The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Doctrines and Discipline of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Doctrines and Discipline of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church


Author: Colored Methodist Episcopal Church

Release date: October 7, 2021 [eBook #66484]

Language: English

Credits: hekula03, Chris Pinfield, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DOCTRINES AND DISCIPLINE OF THE COLORED METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH ***
Transcriber's Note:

Obvious printer errors have been corrected. Hyphenation has been
rationalised.

The text is divided into fifty eight Chapters, which are grouped into
nine Parts. The Chapters are not identified in the Contents pages: they
mostly coincide with the topics noted there, though not with their
numbering. The numbering of pages is occasionally out of sequence,
generally when a topic is discussed more than once.

Both the Index and the Contents Pages use expressions that identify the
page number and section/subsection to which they relate. These
expressions are explained in the Note immediately before the Index.

A number of words and phrases are bolded in the original. These are
identified in this text by =equal signs=. Where the original treatment
is unclear a guess has been necessary.

Passages in smaller font in Part IX (The Ritual), that describe actions
to be taken by a minister or the congregation, are identified by +plus
signs+.




 THE DOCTRINES
 AND
 DISCIPLINE
 OF THE

 COLORED METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH


 REVISED EDITION 1918


 COPYRIGHTED 1918,
 By The AGENT and Publishers of the
 COLORED M. E. CHURCH




=Episcopal Address=


To the Members of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church:

We esteem it our duty and privilege most earnestly to recommend to you,
as members of our Church, our form of Discipline, which has been founded
on the experience of a long series of years.

We wish to see this publication in the house of every member of the
Colored Methodist Episcopal Church; and the more so, as it contains the
Articles of Religion maintained more or less, in part or in whole, by
every reformed Church in the world.

Far from wishing you to be ignorant of any of our doctrines, or any part
of our Discipline, we desire you to read, mark, learn, and inwardly
digest the whole. You ought, next to the Word of God, to procure the
Articles and Canons of the Church to which you belong.

We deem it proper, in this place, to give you a brief account of the
organization of our Connection:

From the introduction of Methodism on this continent, we have ever
constituted a part of the great Methodist family—first, as members of
the Methodist Episcopal Church in America, and also after the change
took place by which we were known as the Methodist Episcopal Church in
the United States; and when the division took place, in 1844, which we
regard as a legal and constitutional division of the Church, we formed a
part of that division called the Methodist Episcopal Church, South,
which relation we continued to sustain until the organization of our
Church took place at the General Conference held at Jackson, Tenn.,
which began its session December 15, 1870. The day was spent in prayer
and supplication to the Almighty that his blessings might rest upon us;
and on the following day the regular business of the session began,
Bishop Robert Paine, D. D., of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, in
the chair.

The circumstances which led to our separate and distinct organization
were as follows:

When the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South,
met in New Orleans, April, 1866, the Conference found that, by
revolution and the fortunes of war, a change had taken place in our
political and social relation, which made it necessary that a change
should also be made in our ecclesiastical relations, and provision was
made for our organization into separate congregations, Districts, and
Annual Conferences, if we desired it; and that when two or more Annual
Conferences should be formed, if it was our wish, and met the
approbation of the Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, we
should have a General Conference organization like that of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, South, and that our preachers should receive
ordination according to the regulations and requirements of the
Methodist Episcopal Church, South, as Deacons and Elders; and should a
General Conference be organized, and suitable men be elected to the
office of Bishops, that the Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church,
South, would ordain and set them apart as Chief Pastors among us. At the
General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, at Memphis,
Tennessee, May, 1870, it was found that five Annual Conferences had been
formed among us, and that an almost universal desire had been expressed
on our part that we might be organized into a separate and distinct
Church, which was acquiesced in by the Bishops of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, South, and recommended to said Conference in their
address; whereupon, by our request, the Bishops of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, South, together with A. L. P. Green, Samuel Watson,
Edmund W. Sehon, Thomas Whitehead, R. J. Morgan, and Thomas Taylor, were
appointed by said Conference to aid in organizing our General Conference
at the time and place above specified. At the succeeding sessions of our
Annual Conferences, delegates were elected to attend our General
Conference, in accordance with the Discipline of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, South.

It was further determined by the acts of the General Conference of the
Methodist Episcopal Church, South, 1866, that should the time arrive
when we should be formed into a separate and distinct organization, that
all property which was intended for the use and benefit of people of
color, held by the Trustees of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South,
should be transferred to Trustees appointed by us, to be held forever
for our use and benefit.

It will be seen from the facts in the case that our record is clear, and
that we have descended regularly from the very father of Methodism, and
that our organization is both legal and constitutional.

We remain your very affectionate brethren and pastors, who labor night
and day, both in public and in private, for your good.

 LUCIUS H. HOLSEY,
 ISAAC LANE,
 ROBERT S. WILLIAMS,
 ELIAS COTTRELL.




CONTENTS


 1. Episcopal Address.


 PART I. Pages 15-33

 Articles of Religion                                              15-29

 General Rules                                                     29-33


 PART II. Pages 37-66

 CONFERENCES

 I. GENERAL CONFERENCE

 How composed, 37:1; delegates, clerical and lay, 37:1-2; voting, 38:3;
 time and place of meeting, 38:4; quorum, 39:8; special session,
 38-39:5-6; presiding officer, 39:9; power and restrictions, 40-42;
 unconstitutional laws, 42.

 II. ANNUAL CONFERENCE

 How composed, 43:1-2; rights and duties of members, 43-44:3-4; number
 and boundaries—how determined, 44:5; time and place, 45:6-7; presiding
 officer, 45:8; order of business, 46-49; character and administration
 of preachers, 49-50:1-5; other business of, 51-53:1-7; committee of
 examination, 51-52; general minutes, 53:8; statistics, 53:10.

 III. DISTRICT CONFERENCE

 Time and place of meeting, 54:1; how composed, 55:2; officers, 55:3-4;
 order of business, 55-56:1-4; lay delegates, 56:3.

 IV. QUARTERLY CONFERENCE

 How composed, 57:1; time and place of meeting, 57:2; duties and powers
 of, 58-60:1-8; divorce, 59:6; order of business, 60-63.

 V. CHURCH CONFERENCE

 How composed, 63:1; secretary, 64:2; order of business, 64-66:4-6.


 PART III Pages 69-93.

 THE MINISTRY

 I. BISHOPS

 How constituted, 69:1-2; duties, 69-74:1-14; retirement of, 74:15;
 restrictions, 75:16-18; veto of, 42.

 II. PRESIDING ELDERS

 Duties and powers of                                              75-78

 III. PASTORS

 Duties of, 78-82; location of preachers, 101:3; supernumerary, 89;
 superannuated, 90.

 IV. THE MINISTER AND THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE

 Reception on trial, 82-83; admitting into full membership, 83-86;
 ministers from other churches, 91-93.

 V. DEACONS

 How constituted, 86:1; qualification, 86:2; duties of, 87:1-3; local
 preachers as, 99:2; ordination of, 317-324.

 VI. ELDERS

 How constituted, 87:1; qualification, 88:1; probation, 88:2; duties of,
 89:1-2; local preachers as, 99-100:3; ordination of, 324-339.


 PART IV. Pages 97-111

 LOCAL PREACHERS, EXHORTERS AND OFFICERS OF THE CHURCH

 I. THE CALL TO PREACH                                             97-98

 II. LOCAL PREACHERS & EXHORTERS

 How made, 98:1; qualification, 98-99:2; deacon, 99:2; Elder, 99-100:3;
 duties of, 100-101:1; certificate of removal, 102:4.

 III. EXHORTERS

 How made, 102:1 duties of, 103:2; further directions, 103:1-3.

 IV. CLASS LEADERS

 How made, 104:1-2; duties, 103-104:3.

 V. STEWARDS

 How made, 105:1; qualification, 106:2; duties of, 106-107:2-3; number
 108:4; junior stewards, 108:5; recording stewards, 109:6.

 VI. STEWARDESSES

 Number and mode of election, 109:7; duties of, 109:7:3; junior,
 109:7:2.

 VII. TRUSTEES

 How made, 110:1; regulations concerning, 110:2; number, 111:3;
 amenability, 111:4.


 PART V.

 CHURCH MEMBERSHIP, ORDER OF WORSHIP; MEANS OF GRACE, ETC.

 I. HOW TO RECEIVE MEMBERS                                           115

 II. ORDER OF PUBLIC WORSHIP                                   116-117:1

 Special directions, 117-118:2-6; prayer meeting, 118.

 III. CLASS MEETINGS                                             119-120

 Division of membership, 119:1; meetings, 119:2; general class, 120:3.

 IV. LOVE FEASTS

 When, and by whom held, 120:1; order of service, 120:2; strangers, 121.

 V. CHILDREN

 Dedication, 121:1; pastoral instruction, 121:2; members of church,
 122:3; catechism and doctrine, 122:4.

 VI. SUNDAY SCHOOL

 How formed, 123; board of managers, 124:2; superintendent of, 124:5;
 department of, 223-228.


 PART VI.

 JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION, Pages 129-159

 I. TRIAL OF A BISHOP

 Investigation, 129; 132:4; suspension, 130; Court of Appeals,
 131-132:3; accusation raised at General Conference, 133:4; trial, 133.

 II. TRIAL OF A TRAVELING PREACHER.

 Amenability, 141:1; investigation, 141-142; trial, 137; improper
 tempers, words, or actions, 137-138:3; erroneous doctrines, 138:4;
 inefficiency, 138:5; refusing to attend work, 139:6.

 III. TRIAL OF A PREACHER ON TRIAL                                140:1.

 IV. TRIAL OF A LOCAL PREACHER

 Amenability, 141:1; investigation, 141-142:1-3; trial, 142:4; improper
 tempers, words, or actions, 142-143:3; erroneous doctrine, 143:4;
 inefficiency, 143:5.

 V. TRIAL OF A MEMBER

 Investigation, 145:a; trial, 145: b, c, d, e; neglect of duty, sinful
 tempers, dancing, etc., 147:2; sowing dissension, 147:3; arbitration,
 148-149.

 VI. MINISTERIAL COURT OF APPEALS

 How composed, 150:1-4; the right of appeal, 151:5; challenge, 151:7;
 further procedure, 152:9.

 VII. APPEAL TO THE GENERAL CONFERENCE

 Appeal carried up, 153:2; trial, 153-154:2-3-4.

 VIII. APPEAL OF A LOCAL PREACHER

 Committee, 155:12; the evidence, 155:3; procedure, 156:4.

 IX. APPEAL OF A MEMBER.

 The evidence, 156-157:2; procedure 157:4.

 X. RESTORATION OF CREDENTIALS

 Traveling Elders and Deacons, 158:1-2; local elders and deacons, 159.


 PART VII. Pages 163-174

 SUPPORT OF THE MINISTRY, BUILDING CHURCHES AND PARSONAGES, SECURING AND
 TRANSFERRING CHURCH PROPERTY

 I. SUPPORT OF THE MINISTRY

 Support of pastors, 163:1; of superannuated preachers, 231:IV:1-3;
 support of presiding elders, 163:2; 185:d; support of Bishops, 164:3;
 179:IV:1; retired Bishops, 164:3; 179:V-2; widows of Bishops, 165:6;
 179:IV:3.

 II. SUPPORT OF GENERAL OFFICERS

 Book Agent and Editor of Christian Index, 191:V:2; secretaries of;
 Missions, 197:5; Church Extension, 205:IV:7; Education, 219:8; Epworth
 League, 213:IV:4; Ministerial Aid, 230, II:6; Sunday School, 225:4; not
 otherwise provided for, 165:4.

 III. CHURCH PROPERTY

 Charitable institutions, 166:1; building churches, 166-168:II; building
 parsonages, 169:III.

 IV. BUYING AND SELLING CHURCH PROPERTY

 Securing churches and lots, 170-171:1; securing parsonages and lots,
 171-172:2; sale of church property, authority of, 172:II:2; relief of
 trustees, 173:3.


 PART VIII. Pages 177-258.

 BOARDS AND DEPARTMENTS

 I. FINANCIAL PLAN

 General Assessment, 177:1:1; Board of Equalization, 177:II:1-2; Book
 Agent, 178-182:III:V:VII.

 II. JOINT BOARD OF FINANCE

 How constituted, 184:2; duties of, 185-186:3:a-g; right of Annual
 Conference, 186:5.

 III. Publishing Department                                      187-193

 IV. Gen. Missionary Department                                  193-199

 V. Woman's H. Miss. Society                                     199-201

 VI. Woman's Gen. Miss. Board                                    375-376

 VII. Church Extension Board                                     201-209

 VIII. Epworth League Board                                      209-214

 IX. Board of Education                                          214-223

 X. Sunday School Board                                          223-228

 XI. Superannuated Preachers, Widows and Orphans Board           228-233

 XII.  MISCELLANEOUS

 Children's Day, 233-234; General Missionary Day, 234; Official Meeting,
 235; The Western Index, 236; the Eastern Index, 237.

 XIII. Schools and Colleges                                      237-245

 XIV. Founder's Day                                              245-246

 XV. Names and Boundaries of conferences                         247-258


PART IX. Pages 261-353

THE RITUAL

 I. The Lord's Supper                                            261-273

 II. Baptism of Infants                                          273-278

 III. Baptism of Adults                                          278-285

 IV. Reception of Members                                        285-290

 V. Matrimony                                                    290-295

 VI. Burial of the Dead                                          295-304

 VII. CORNER STONE and DEDICATION

 Form for laying Corner Stone of Church, 305-310; form for dedication of
 church, 311-317.

 VIII. ORDINATION

 Form of ordaining deacons, 317; 324; of elders, 324-339; of
 consecrating Bishops, 339-353.


 APPENDIX

 PART X. Pages 355-377

 I. Addresses of Bishops and General Officers                    355-356

 II. Commissions and Boards                                      357-359

 III. COURSE OF STUDY FOR PREACHERS.

 Local preachers, 361-362; traveling preachers, 362-364.

 IV. Rules for Organization and Conduct of General Conference    365-374

 V. Woman's General Missionary Society                           375-377




 =PART I=
 THE CONSTITUTION

 CHAPTER I.
 ARTICLES OF RELIGION


I. OF FAITH IN THE HOLY TRINITY.

There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body or
parts; of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness; the maker and preserver
of all things, both visible and invisible. And in unity of this Godhead,
there are three persons of one substance, power, and eternity—the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.


II. OF THE WORD, OR SON OF GOD WHO WAS MADE VERY MAN.

The Son, who is the Word of the Father, the very and eternal God, of one
substance with the Father, took man's nature in the womb of the blessed
Virgin; so that two whole and perfect natures—that is to say, the
Godhead and manhood—were joined together in one person, never to be
divided, whereof is one Christ, very God and very man, who truly
suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile his Father to us,
and to be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for actual
sins of men.


III. OF THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST

Christ did truly rise again from the dead, and took again his body, with
all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature, wherewith he
ascended into heaven, and there sitteth until he return to judge all men
at the last day.


IV. OF THE HOLY GHOST.

The Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one
substance, majesty, and glory, with the Father and the Son, very and
eternal God.


V. THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES FOR SALVATION

The Holy Scriptures contain all things necessary to salvation; so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of faith,
or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. In the name of the
Holy Scripture, we do understand those canonical books of the Old and
New Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church.


THE NAMES OF THE CANONICAL BOOKS

Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth,
The First Book of Samuel, The Second Book of Samuel, The First Book of
Kings, The Second Book of Kings, The First Book of Chronicles, The
Second Book of Chronicles, The Book of Ezra, The Book of Nehemiah, The
Book of Esther, The Book of Job, The Psalms, The Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
or the Preacher, Cantica, or Songs of Solomon, Four Prophets the
greater, Twelve Prophets the less. All the books of the New Testament,
as they are commonly received, we do receive and account canonical.


VI. OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

The Old Testament is not contrary to the New; for both in the Old and
New Testament everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is
the only Mediator between God and man, being God and man. Wherefore,
they are not to be heard who feign that the old fathers did look only
for transitory promises. Although the law given from God by Moses, as
touching ceremonies and rites, doth not bind Christians, nor ought the
civil precepts thereof of necessity to be received in any Commonwealth,
yet, notwithstanding, no Christian whatsoever is free from the obedience
of the commandments which are called moral.


VII. OF ORIGINAL OR BIRTH-SIN

Original Sin standeth not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelagians do
vainly talk,) but it is the corruption of the nature of every man, that
naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very
far gone from original righteousness, and of his own nature inclined to
evil, and that continually.


VIII. OF FREE-WILL

The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such that he can not turn
and prepare himself, by his own natural strength and works, to faith and
calling upon God; wherefore we have no power to do good works, pleasant
and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us,
that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we have that
good will.


IX. OF THE JUSTIFICATION OF MAN

We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, by faith, and not for our own works or
deservings; wherefore, that we are justified by faith only, is a most
wholesome doctrine, and very full of comfort.


X. OF GOOD WORKS

Although good works, which are the fruits of faith and follow after
justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of
God's judgment; yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ,
and spring out of a true and lively faith, insomuch that by them a
lively faith may be as evidently known as a tree discerned by its fruit.


XI. OF WORKS OF SUPEREROGATION

Voluntary works, besides over and above God's commandments, which are
called works of supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogancy and
impiety. For by them men do declare that they do not only render unto
God as much as they are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake
than of bounded duty is required; whereas Christ saith plainly, When ye
have done all that is commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants.


XII. OF SIN AFTER JUSTIFICATION

Not every sin willingly committed after justification, is the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore, the grant of
repentance is not to be denied to such as fall into sin after
justification. After we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from
grace given, and fall into sin, and, by the grace of God, rise again and
amend our lives. And, therefore, they are to be condemned who say they
can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny the place of
forgiveness to such as truly repent.


XIII. OF THE CHURCH

The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in which
the pure word of God is preached, and the sacraments duly administered,
according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity
are requisite to the same.


XIV. OF PURGATORY

The Romanish doctrine concerning purgatory, pardons, worshiping, and
adoration, as well of images as of relics, and also invocation of
saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrant
of Scripture, but repugnant to the word of God.


XV. OF SPEAKING IN THE CONGREGATION IN SUCH A TONGUE AS THE PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND

It is a thing plainly repugnant to the word of God and the custom of the
Primitive Church, to have public prayer in the Church or to minister the
sacraments in a tongue not understood by the people.


XVI. OF THE SACRAMENTS

Sacraments, ordained of Christ, are not only badges or tokens of
Christian men's profession, but rather they are certain signs of grace,
and God's good will toward us, by the which he doth work invisibly in
us, and doth not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith
in him.

There are two sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel; that
is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called sacraments—that is to say, Confirmation,
Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction—are not to be counted
for sacraments of the Gospel, being such as have partly grown out of the
=corrupt= following of the apostles, and partly are states of life
allowed in the Scriptures, but yet have not the like nature of Baptism
and the Lord's Supper, because they have not any visible sign or
ceremony ordained of God.

The sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be
carried about; but that we should duly use them. And in such only as
worthily receive the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation;
but they that receive them unworthily purchase to themselves
condemnation, as St. Paul saith, 1 Cor. xi. 29.


XVII. OF BAPTISM

Baptism is not only a sign of profession and mark of difference whereby
Christians are distinguished from others that are not baptized; but it
is also a sign of regeneration, or the new birth. The baptism of young
children is to be retained in the Church.


XVIII. OF THE LORD'S SUPPER

The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love that Christians
ought to have among themselves one to another, but rather is a sacrament
of our redemption by Christ's death; insomuch that, to such as rightly,
worthily, and with faith receive the same, the bread which we break is a
partaking of the body of Christ; and likewise the cup of blessing is a
partaking of the blood of Christ.

Transubstantiation, or the change of the substance of bread and wine in
the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ, but is repugnant
to the plain words of Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a sacrament,
and hath given occasion to many superstitions.

The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after
a heavenly and spiritual manner. And the means whereby the body of
Christ is received and eaten in the Supper, is faith.

The sacrament of the Lord's Supper was not by Christ's ordinance
reserved, carried about, lifted up, or worshiped.


XIX. OF BOTH KINDS

The cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay people; for both the
parts of the Lord's Supper, by Christ's ordinance and commandment, ought
to be administered to all Christians alike.


XX. OF THE ONE OBLATION OF CHRIST, FINISHED UPON THE CROSS

The offering of Christ once made, is that perfect redemption,
propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both
original and actual; and there is none other satisfaction for sin but
that alone. Wherefore the sacrifice of masses, in the which it is
commonly said that the priest doth offer Christ for the quick and the
dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, is a blasphemous fable and
dangerous deceit.


XXI. OF THE MARRIAGE OF MINISTERS

The ministers of Christ are not commanded by God's law either to vow the
estate of single life or to abstain from marriage; therefore it is
lawful to marry at their own discretion, as for them, as for all other
Christians, they shall judge the same to serve best to Godliness.


XXII. OF THE RITES AND CEREMONIES OF CHURCHES

It is not necessary that rites and ceremonies should in all places be
the same, or exactly alike; for they have been always different, and may
be changed according to the diversity of countries, times, and men's
manners, so that nothing be ordained against God's word. Whosoever,
through his private judgment, willingly and purposely, doth openly break
the rites and ceremonies of the Church to which he belongs, which are
not repugnant to the word of God, and are ordained and approved by
common authority, ought to be rebuked openly, that others may fear to do
the like, as one that offendeth against the common order of the Church,
and woundeth the consciences of weak brethren.

Every particular Church may ordain, change, or abolish rights and
ceremonies, so that all things may be done to edification.


XXIII. OF THE RULERS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

The president, the congress, the general assemblies, the governors, and
the councils of state, =as the delegates of the people= are the rulers
of the United States of America, according to the division of power made
to them by the constitution of the United States, and by the
constitution of their respective States. And the said States are a
sovereign and independent nation, and ought not to be subject to any
foreign jurisdiction.[1]


XXIV. OF CHRISTIAN MEN'S GOODS

The riches and goods of Christians are not common, as touching the
right, title, and possession of the same, as some do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding, every man ought, of such things as he possesseth,
liberally to give alms to the poor according to his ability.


XXV. OF A CHRISTIAN MAN'S OATH

As we confess that vain and rash by our Lord Jesus Christ and James, his
apostle, so we judge that the Christian religion doth not prohibit, but
that a man may swear when the magistrate requireth, in a cause of faith
swearing is forbidden Christian men and charity, so it be done according
to the prophet's teaching, in justice judgment, and truth.

[Footnote 1: As far as it respects civil affairs, we believe it the duty
of Christians and especially all Christian ministers, to be subject to
the supreme authority of the country where they reside, and to use all
laudable means to enjoin obedience to the powers that be; and,
therefore, it is expected that all our preachers and people, who may be
under any foreign government, will behave themselves as peaceable and
orderly subjects.]




 CHAPTER II.
 THE GENERAL RULES


The General Rules of "The United Societies" organized by Mr. Wesley in
1739, are as follows:

There is only one condition previously required of those who desire
admission into these societies, a "desire to flee from the wrath to
come, and to be saved from their sins." But wherever this is really
fixed in the soul, it will be shown by its fruits. It is therefore
expected of all who continue therein that they shall evidence their
desire of salvation—

First, by doing no harm, by avoiding evil of every kind, especially that
which is most generally practiced; such as:

The taking of the name of God in vain;

The profaning the day of the Lord, either by doing ordinary work
therein, or by buying or selling;

Drunkenness, or drinking spirituous liquors unless in cases of
necessity;

=Fighting=, quarreling, brawling, brother =going to law= with brother,
returning evil for evil, or railing for railing; the =using many words=
in buying or selling.

The =buying or selling goods that have not paid the duty=;

The =giving or taking things on usury=, i.e., unlawful interest;

=Uncharitable or unprofitable= conversation, particularly, speaking evil
of magistrates or of ministers;

Doing to others as we would not they should do unto us;

Doing what we know is not for the glory of God: as,

The =putting on of gold and costly apparel=;

The =taking such diversions= as can not be used in the name of the Lord
Jesus;

The =singing= those =songs=, or =reading= those =books=, which do not
tend to the knowledge or love of God;

Softness or needless self-indulgence;

Laying up treasure upon earth;

Borrowing without a probability of paying, or taking up goods without a
probability of paying for them.

It is expected of all who continue in these societies, that they should
continue to evidence their desire of salvation—

Secondly, by doing good, by being in every kind merciful after their
power, as they have opportunity, doing good of every possible sort, and
as far as possible, to all men;

To their bodies, of the ability which God giveth, by giving food to the
hungry, by clothing the naked, by visiting or helping them that are sick
or in prison;

To their souls, by instructing, reproving, or exhorting all we have any
intercourse with, trampling under foot that enthusiastic doctrine that
we are not to do good unless =our hearts be free to do it=.

By doing good, especially to them that are of the household of faith, or
groaning so to be, employing them preferably to others, buying one of
another, helping each other in business; and so much the more because
the world will love its own, and them =only=.

By all possible diligence and =frugality=, that the gospel be not
blamed. By running with patience the race which is set before them,
=denying themselves, and taking up their cross daily=; submitting to
bear the reproach of Christ, to be as the filth and off-scouring of the
world; and looking that men should say =all manner of evil of them
falsely for the Lord's sake=.

It is expected of all who desire to continue in these societies that
they should continue to evidence their desire of salvation—

Thirdly, by attending upon all the ordinances of God, such as;

The public worship of God;

The ministry of the word, either read =or= expounded;

The Supper of the Lord;

Family and private prayer;

Searching the Scriptures, and

Fasting or abstinence.

These are the General Rules of our societies; all of which we are taught
of God to observe, even in his written word, which is the only rule, and
the sufficient rule, both of our faith and practice. And all these we
know his Spirit writes on truly awakened hearts. If there be any among
us who observe them not, who habitually break any of them, let it be
known unto them who watch over that soul, as they who must give an
account. We will admonish him of the error of his ways; we will bear
with him for a season; but if then he repent not, he hath no more place
among us; we have delivered our own souls.




 =PART II.=
 THE CONFERENCES




 CHAPTER III.
 GENERAL CONFERENCE


Ques. 1. Who shall compose the General Conference, and what are the
regulations and powers belonging to it?

Ans. 1. The General Conference shall be composed of one clerical member
for every twenty-eight members of each Annual Conference, and one lay
member (who may be a local preacher) for each Annual Conference, to be
appointed as follows:

The clerical representatives shall be elected by the clerical members of
the Annual Conference: =provided= that such representatives shall have
traveled at least four calendar years from the time they were received
on trial, and are in full connection at the time of holding the
Conference. The lay representatives shall be elected by the lay members
of the Annual Conference: =provided= that such representatives be
twenty-five years of age, and shall have been members of the Church for
at least six years at the time of holding the Conference.

2. An Annual Conference, entitled under the second Restrictive Rule to
two ministerial delegates, shall not be denied the privilege of two lay
delegates also.

3. The ministers and laymen shall deliberate in one body; but upon a
call of one-fifth of the members of the Conference, the lay and clerical
members shall vote separately, and no measure shall be passed without
the concurrence of a majority of both classes of representatives.

4. The General Conference shall meet in the month of May, once in four
years perpetually, in such place or places as shall be fixed on by the
General Conference from time to time.

5. The Bishops, or a majority of all the Annual Conferences shall have
authority to call a General Conference, if they judge it necessary, at
any time.

6. When a General Conference is called, it shall be constituted of the
delegates elected to the preceding General Conference, except when an
Annual Conference shall prefer to have a new election. The place of
holding a called session of the General Conference shall be that fixed
by the preceding General Conference.

7. The Bishops shall have authority, when they judge it necessary, to
change the place appointed for the meeting of the General Conference.

8. At all times when the General Conference is met, it shall take a
majority of the representatives of all the Annual Conferences to make a
quorum for transacting business.

9. One of the general superintendents shall preside in the General
Conference; but in case no general superintendent be present, the
General Conference shall choose a president =pro tem=.

10. The General Conference shall have full powers to make rules and
regulations for our Church under the following limitations and
restrictions, viz:

 (1) The General Conference shall not revoke, alter, or change our
 Articles of Religion, or establish any new standards or rule of
 doctrine contrary to our present existing and established standards of
 doctrine.

 (2) They shall not allow of more than one representative for every
 fourteen members of the Annual Conference, nor allow of a less number
 than one for every thirty; =provided=, nevertheless, that when there
 shall be in any Annual Conference a fraction of two-thirds the number
 which shall be fixed for the ratio of representation, such Annual
 Conference shall be entitled to an additional delegate for such
 fraction; and =provided=, also, that no Conference shall be denied the
 privilege of two delegates.

 (3) They shall not change or alter any part or rule of our government,
 so as to do away with episcopacy, or destroy the plan of our itinerant
 general superintendency.

 (4) They shall not revoke or change the General Rules of the United
 Societies.

 (5) They shall not do away with the privilege of our ministers or
 preachers of trial by a committee and of an appeal; neither shall they
 do away with the privileges of our members of trial before the Church
 or by a committee, and of an appeal.

=Provided=, nevertheless, that upon the concurrent recommendation of
three-fourths of all the members of the several Annual Conferences, who
shall be present and vote on such recommendation, then a majority of
two-thirds of the General Conference succeeding shall suffice to alter
any of the above restrictions, excepting the first article; and also,
whenever such alterations shall have been first recommended by
two-thirds of the General Conference, so soon as three-fourths of the
members of all the Annual Conferences shall have concurred as aforesaid,
such alteration or alterations shall take effect.

=Provided=, that when any rule or regulation is adopted by the General
Conference, which, in the opinion of the Bishops, is unconstitutional,
the Bishops may present to the Conference which passed said rule or
regulation, their objections thereto, with their reasons, in writing;
and if then the General Conference shall, by a two-thirds vote, adhere
to its action on said rule or regulation, it shall then take the course
prescribed for altering a restrictive rule, and thus passed upon
affirmatively, the Bishops shall announce that such rule or regulation
takes effect from that time.




 CHAPTER IV.
 ANNUAL CONFERENCES.


Ques. 1. Who shall compose an Annual Conference, and what are the
regulations and powers belonging to it?

Ans. 1. All the traveling preachers in full connection with it, and four
lay representatives—one of whom may be a local preacher—from each
Presiding Elder's District.

2. The lay members shall be chosen annually by the District Conferences;
=provided= that no one shall be a representative who is not twenty-five
years of age, and who has not been for six years, next preceding his
election, a member of the Church.

3. The lay members shall participate in all the business of the
Conference, except such as involves ministerial character.

4. It shall be the duty of all the members of the Conference to attend
its sessions, unless providentially hindered. All the preachers on
trial, and those to be admitted on trial, shall also attend the
sessions, but they shall not vote on any question, nor speak unless by
consent of the Conference.

Ques. 2. Who shall determine the number and boundaries of the Annual
Conferences?

Ans. The General Conference.

=Provided=, however, that the Annual Conference or Conferences shall
have the right to create other conferences in the interval of the
General Conferences. The Conference or Conferences desiring to create a
new Conference shall appoint a Commission for the purpose of arranging
the boundary line of such Conference and giving it a suitable name. The
Commission shall submit its report to the ensuing Conference or
Conferences for ratification or rejection. In all cases the report of
the Commission to become effective must be adopted by the Conference or
Conferences which appointed the Commission.

Ques. 3. Who shall appoint the times of holding the Annual Conferences?

Ans. The Bishops; but they shall allow every Annual Conference to sit a
week at least.

Ques. 4. Who shall appoint the places of holding the Annual Conferences?

Ans. Each Annual Conference shall appoint the place of its own sitting;
but should it become necessary from any unforeseen cause to change the
place after it has been fixed by the Conference, a majority of the
Presiding Elders, with the consent of the Bishop who is to preside,
shall have power to make such change.

Ques. 5. Who shall preside in the Annual Conferences?

Ans. The Bishops. In the absence of a Bishop, the Conference shall elect
the president by ballot, without debate, from among the traveling
elders. The president thus elected shall discharge all the duties of a
Bishop except ordination.

Ques. 6. What is the method of proceeding in an Annual Conference?

Ans. The following questions shall be asked:

 1. Are all the preachers blameless in their life and official
 administration?

 2. Who are admitted on trial?

 3. Who remain on trial?

 4. Who are discontinued?

 5. Who are admitted into full connection?

 6. Who are re-admitted?

 7. Who are received by transfer from other Conferences?

 8. Who are the deacons of one year?

 9. What traveling preachers are elected deacons?

 10. What traveling preachers are ordained deacons?

 11. What local preachers are elected deacons?

 12. What local preachers are ordained deacons?

 13. What traveling preachers are elected elders?

 14. What traveling preachers are ordained elders?

 15. What local preachers are elected elders?

 16. What local preachers are ordained elders?

 17. Who are located this year?

 18. Who are supernumerary?

 19. Who are superannuated this year?[2]

20. What preachers have died during the year?

 21. What is the number of traveling preachers in this Conference?

 22. What is the number of local preachers in this Conference?

 23. What is the number of lay members in this Conference?

 24. How many infants have been baptized during the year?

 25. How many adults have been baptized during the year?

 26. What is the number of Sunday-schools?

 27. What is the number of Sunday-school teachers?

 28. What is the number of Sunday-school scholars?

 29. What is the number of Epworth League Chapters?

 30. What is the number of Epworth League members?

 31. What amount has been raised for superannuated preachers, widows,
 and orphans of preachers? (a) from General Funds? (b) from five cents
 assessment? (c) from per capita collection at the Annual Conference?

 32. What amount has been received by claimants in this Conference?[3]

 33. What was contributed for missions on General Missionary Day?

 34. What amount was contributed for education on Children's Day?

 35. What amount has been contributed for Church Extension?

 36. What amount was apportioned in this Conference for General Funds?

 37. What amount has been raised on General Funds this year?

 38. What amount was apportioned in this Conference for Annual
 Conference Contingent Fund?

 39. What has been raised on Annual Conference Contingent Fund?

 40. Where shall the next session of the conference be held?

 41. Where are the preachers stationed this year?

Ques. 7. What method is recommended in the examination of the life and
official administration of the preachers?

Ans. 1. Let none be present except members of the Conference, and others
who may be in attendance on Conference business, unless the Conference
by vote shall order otherwise.

2. Let the name of every preacher be called, and let his Presiding
Elder, or some other member of the Conference, state whether or not
there be any complaint against him. If there be none, he may retire, and
the Conference may make further inquiry concerning him, and pass his
character without vote.

3. If there be a complaint, and the preacher has been advised of it, let
it be stated to the Conference, and let the accused have the privilege
of replying. He shall then retire, and the Conference shall determine by
vote whether or not his character shall pass.

4. If a trial be necessary, it shall be conducted according to the
provisions of Chapter XXIV.

5. The names of any who may be expelled or suspended, or who may have
withdrawn from the Church, shall be stated in the minutes.

Ques. 8. What other business shall be done in the Annual Conference?

Ans. 1. Let every Annual Conference inquire into the state and character
of all the institutions of learning that may be under its care, and the
best means of promoting their interests, and, if necessary, of
increasing their number. =Provided=, no member of the C. M. E. Church,
bishop, presiding elder, or preacher shall establish a school in the
name of the C. M. E. Church without first getting the consent of the
Quarterly or Annual Conference within whose bounds said school may be
located.

2. Let every Annual Conference take account of all the church buildings,
parsonages, and other church property within its bounds, and see that
same be legally secured to the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church,
according to the provisions of the Discipline.

3. In each Annual Conference, the bishop presiding shall appoint a
committee of examination on the course of study provided for candidates
for the ministry. The committee of examination shall consist of not less
than three (3) nor more than eleven (11) of the most competent members
of the conference. The committee shall serve four years, provided they
are appointed at the first session of the conference following the
General Conference. The Bishop may appoint one or more of the committee
as often as he thinks the interests of the work require it.

4. The committee of examination shall assemble one day in advance of the
Conference, and at the same place, to hold examination for all
candidates. As far as practicable, all examinations shall be conducted
in writing and at least ten (10) questions shall be proposed in each
branch of study.

5. All applicants for admission on trial, into full connection and for
ordination, and all local preachers seeking ordination as deacons or
elders, must be examined in the course of study provided by the bishops
and approved by the General Conference. All applicants must meet the
committee one day before the opening of the Annual Conference.

6. The standard of examination shall be one hundred (100), but in no
case shall an applicant be promoted or ordained who falls below seventy
(70) in examination, provided, nevertheless the provisions for ordaining
Missionaries be not changed.

7. Let every Annual Conference have a record of its proceedings, kept by
a secretary chosen for that purpose; said record shall be signed by the
President and the Secretary, and a copy of the same be sent to the
General Conference at its next ensuing session.

8. The Secretary of each Annual Conference shall forward to the Editor
of the =Christian Index= or Book Agent full and correct answers to the
foregoing forty-one questions, for insertion into the General Minutes,
according to the form therein adopted.

9. The Joint Board of Finance shall fix the salary and traveling
expenses of the Presiding Elders, and apportion the same in and to the
several charges within the District.

10. SECRETARY OF STATISTICS

 (a) The Secretary of Statistics shall keep a record of the number of
 itinerant ministers and lay members, the number of churches and
 parsonages, the value of the same by Annual Conferences; all moneys
 raised for general and local purposes shall be tabulated by Annual
 Conferences, and published in pamphlet form annually. The pamphlet
 containing such information shall be known as "The Year Book of the C.
 M. E. Church," and shall be printed by the Book Agent.

 (b) The Secretary of each Annual Conference shall, as soon as the
 conference closes, send to the Secretary of Statistics an accurate
 return from the Statistical Secretary and Joint Board of Finance, all
 figures necessary to be used in making up said "Year Book."

[Footnote 2: NOTE: Let the answer to this question embrace the names of
all superannuated with the date of their superannuation.]

[Footnote 3: Let answer embrace amount paid to each claimant in the
conference.]


 CHAPTER V.
 DISTRICT CONFERENCES


Ques. 1. What directions are given concerning District Conferences?

Ans. 1. There shall be held annually, in each presiding elder's
District, a District Conference. The time shall be fixed by the
Presiding Elder, and the place by the conference.

2. The District Conference shall be composed of all the preachers, in
the District, both traveling and local, and of laymen, the number of
whom, and their mode of appointment, each Annual Conference may
determine for itself.

3. The Presiding Elder shall preside. In his absence, the Conference
shall elect a president.

4. The Conference shall elect a secretary, who shall keep a record of
all its proceedings.

1. It shall be the duty of the Conference to examine Quarterly
Conference Journals, and to inquire particularly into the condition of
the several charges in the District:—

 (a) As to their spiritual state, and

 (b) As to missions within the District, where new ones should be
 established, or what missions should be raised to circuits or stations.

 (c) As to the Sunday-schools, and the manner of conducting them, and as
 to education generally.

 (d) As to the financial system, the contributions to church purposes,
 and the condition of houses of worship and parsonages.

 (e) As to the mission work and Church Extension; the amount raised for
 each.

 (f) As to the Epworth League chapters and the manner of conducting
 them.

2. (a) Hearing reports from Special Committees.

 (b) Reading and discussion of papers.

3. The District Conference shall elect annually, by ballot, from the
District, four delegates to the ensuing Annual Conference; =provided=,
no member of the Annual Conference shall vote in said election.

4. At these conferences prominence shall be given to religious
exercises, such as preaching, prayer meetings, love feast, and the
administration of the sacraments.




 CHAPTER VI.
 QUARTERLY CONFERENCES.


Ques. 1. Who shall compose a Quarterly Conference?

Ans. All the traveling and local preachers, exhorters, stewards (senior
and junior), stewardesses (senior and junior), trustees of church
property, class leaders, presidents of Epworth League chapters,
Presidents of Woman's Missionary Societies, Superintendents of Sunday
Schools, Secretaries of Church Conferences, and choristers, who are
members of the church, and none else.

Ques. 2. When and where shall each Quarterly Conference meet?

Ans. Four times a year, at such place as the Conference may appoint, and
at such time as the Presiding Elder may designate.

Ques. 3. Who shall preside in a Quarterly Conference?

Ans. The Presiding Elder, or, in his absence, the preacher in charge.

Ques. 4. What is the regular business of a Quarterly Conference?

Ans. 1. To receive and try appeals, to hear complaints, and examine
Church Records and Registers.

2. To superintend the interests of Sunday-schools and the instruction of
children.

3. To take cognizance of all the local preachers and exhorters in the
circuits, stations, or missions, and to inquire annually into the gifts,
labors, and usefulness of each by name.

4. To try, suspend, expel, or acquit any local preacher in the circuit,
station, or mission, against whom charges may be brought.

5. To license proper persons to exhort and to preach; =provided= that no
person shall thus be licensed to either preach or exhort who, for any
cause, marries a divorced woman; to renew their license annually, when,
in its judgment, their gifts, grace, and usefulness will warrant a
renewal. All votes to license preachers shall be taken by ballot.

6. To recommend suitable candidates to the Annual Conference for
deacon's or elder's orders in the local connection, and for admission on
trial and re-admission into the traveling connection: =Provided= (a)
that no one shall be admitted or allowed to remain in the traveling
connection who marries a divorced woman: =Provided= (b) that no person
shall be recommended to the Annual Conference for admission on trial, or
for ordination, without first being examined in the Quarterly Conference
on the subject of doctrine and discipline, and giving satisfactory
evidence of his ability to read the word of God. All votes to recommend
preachers for admission on trial, or re-admission into the traveling
connection, or for deacon's or elder's orders shall be taken by ballot.

7. To elect trustees, stewards, and stewardesses, superintendents of
Sunday-schools, according to the discipline, for the circuit, station,
or mission, and of the stewards, to appoint one a Recording Steward.

8. To see that all its proceedings be faithfully recorded, by a
secretary chosen for the purpose, in a book to be kept by the Recording
Steward; the records of each session being signed by the President and
Secretary.

Ques. 5. What order of business shall be observed in the Quarterly
Conference?

Ans. After religious service, let the roll be called, and the following
inquiries be made—

1. Are there any appeals?

2. Are there any complaints?

3. Is there a written report from—

 (a) The Pastor as to the number and state of the church?

 (b) The Superintendent as to the number and state of the Sunday School?

 (c) Senior and Junior Stewards?

 (d) Senior and Junior Stewardesses?

 (e) Trustees of Church Property?

 (f) Woman's Missionary Society?

 (g) Epworth League?

 (h) Church Extension?

 (i) Chorister?

4. What were the estimated claims, and what the final settlement of the
same, in the charge, during the past year?

 (1) The answer to this question will embrace the amount assessed and
 paid Presiding Elder, Pastor, General Funds, Church Extension,
 Missions, Education, Superannuated preachers, widows, and orphans of
 preachers and other items.

5. What amount has been estimated by the Board of Stewards for the
support of the preacher in charge, and his assistant, for the present
year? (1 or 2).

6. What amount has been apportioned this charge by the Joint Board of
Finance: 1, for Presiding Elder's salary and traveling expenses? 2, for
General Funds, Education, Missions and Church Extension? (1 or 2).

7. Are there any applications—

 (a) For license to exhort?

 (b) For license to preach?

8. Who are elected to fill vacancies in the Board of Trustees?

9. What amount was raised for education on Children's Day? (3 or 4.)

10. Have the General Rules been read?

11. Is there a Church Register, and a Record of Church Conferences for
each church on the charge, and have they been faithfully kept?

12. Have the exhorters and local preachers passed an examination of
character, and have their license been renewed? (3 or 4.)

13. Are there any applications to the Annual Conference to be admitted
on trial into the traveling connection, or for re-admission? (4).

14. What local preachers are recommended to the Annual Conference for
ordination? (4.)

15. Who are elected Senior and Junior Stewards, and Senior and Junior
Stewardesses for the ensuing conference year?

16. Who is elected Recording Steward? (4.)

17. Who are elected Sunday School Superintendents? (4.)

18. What amount was raised for Missions on General Missionary Day? (3
or 4.)

19. What are the statistics to be reported to the Annual Conference?
(4.)

20. Is there any miscellaneous business?

21. Where shall the next Quarterly Conference be held?




 CHAPTER VII.
 CHURCH CONFERENCES


Ques. 1. What directions are given concerning Church Conferences?

Ans. 1. All the members of the Church, and resident members of the
Annual Conference shall come together once a month, or on circuits at
least every three months, at every appointment, to hold a Church
Conference, over which the preacher in charge shall preside. It may be
held at any time most convenient for assembling the greatest number of
members; but if on the Sabbath, it should not interfere with the morning
public worship.

2. A secretary shall be elected annually, at the first meeting after the
session of the Annual Conference. He shall make a record of the
proceedings, and shall keep in a book, and return to the Quarterly
Conference, all statistics which the Discipline requires to be reported
to an Annual Conference.

3. The roll of members shall be called at every meeting, unless
otherwise ordered, and the Conference may strike off the names of any
who, on account of removal or other causes, have been lost sight of for
twelve months; =provided=, however, that if such member appears and
claims membership, he may be restored by a vote of the meeting.

4. The following is suggested as the general order of business:

1. Receive reports—

 (a) From the preachers, of their labors since the last meeting.

 (b) From the class leaders.

 (c) From the Sunday-schools.

 (d) From the stewards and stewardesses of that Church.

2. The Conference shall inquire—

 (a) What is the number of the poor of the Church?

 (b) Have they been provided for?

 (c) Is the church here doing its duty for the cause of missions and
 other Church enterprises, and for the collections ordered by the Annual
 Conference?

 (d) Is our religious literature circulated and read?

 (e) Can the Church extend its work by establishing additional prayer
 meetings, Sunday-schools or in any other way?

 (f) Can anything more be done to strengthen and build up the Church in
 the community, and to advance the cause of Christ?

5. If the observance of this order of business is likely to protract the
session beyond a reasonable limit, the president may, from time to time,
select the most important matters and bring them forward.

6. Let the Church Conference be opened and closed with religious
service, and conducted in a devout and prayerful spirit.




 =PART III.=
 THE MINISTER




 CHAPTER VIII.
 THE ELECTION AND CONSECRATION OF BISHOPS AND THEIR DUTIES


Ques. 1. How is a Bishop to be constituted?

Ans. By the election of the General Conference, and the laying on of
hands of three Bishops, or at least of one Bishop and two Elders.

Ques. 2. If by death, expulsion, or otherwise, there be no Bishop
remaining in our church, what shall we do?

Ans. The General Conference shall elect a Bishop; and the Elders, or any
three of them, who shall be appointed by the General Conference for that
purpose, shall ordain him according to our form of ordination.

Ques. 3. What are the duties of a Bishop?

Ans. 1 (a) To preside in the General and Annual Conferences.

 (b) To fix the appointments of the preachers in the Annual Conferences;
 =provided=, he shall not allow any preacher to remain in the same
 circuit, station or mission more than six years successively, except
 where the presiding Bishop thinks a longer term of service will promote
 the welfare of the charge. The Book Agent, Editor of the Christian
 Index, the Secretaries of Missions, Church Extension and Epworth
 Leagues, superannuated and supernumerary preachers, Missionaries in
 foreign stations, Chaplains to military posts, preachers who may be
 appointed to labor for seamen and the American Bible Society and the
 presidents, principals or other teachers of seminaries and other
 institutions of learning under our superintendence are exceptions to
 the =time limit= as above indicated,
 
 (c) When requested by an annual conference, the Bishop may appoint a
 preacher for a term of years to any seminary or institution of learning
 not under our supervision and care.
  
 (d) He shall have authority when requested by the Annual Conference to
 appoint an agent, who shall travel throughout the bounds of such
 conference for the purpose of organizing Sunday Schools, aiding needy
 ones, and distributing tracts. (e) When requested by any annual
 conference, he shall have authority to appoint an agent or agents who
 shall travel and work in the interest of our literary institutions.

Sec. 2. To choose the Presiding Elders, fix their stations, and to
change them when he judges it necessary, provided, however, that no
Elder shall preside longer than six years consecutively, nor shall be
reappointed to a district until he has served, at least, two years, in
the pastorate or otherwise. (Mission fields excepted.)

3. To change, receive, and suspend preachers in the intervals of the
Conferences, as necessity may require, and as the Discipline directs.

4. To ordain bishops, elders, and deacons; and to see that the names of
the persons ordained by him be entered on the journals of the
Conference.

5. To decide all questions of law coming before him in the regular
business of an Annual Conference: =provided=, such questions be
presented in writing, and with his decisions be recorded on the journals
of the Conference. When the Bishop shall have decided a question of law,
the Conference shall have the right to determine how far the law thus
decided or interpreted is applicable to the case then pending. An Annual
Conference shall have a right to appeal from such decision to the
College of Bishops, whose decision in such cases shall be final. And no
Episcopal decision shall be authoritative except in the case pending,
nor shall any such be published until it shall have been approved by the
College of Bishops. And each Bishop shall report in writing to the
Episcopal College, at an annual meeting to be held by them, such
decisions as he has made subsequently to the last preceding meeting; and
all such decisions, when approved by the College of Bishops, shall be
recorded in a permanent form, and published in such manner as the
Bishops shall agree to adopt; and when so approved, recorded, and
published, they shall be authoritative interpretations or constructions
of the law.

6. To hear and decide appeals of the Quarterly Conferences on questions
of law, when he shall be presiding in any Annual Conference; and the
question contained in the appeal, together with the Bishop's decision,
shall be recorded on the journal of the Annual Conference.

7. To see that the Districts be formed according to his judgment;
=provided=, that no District shall contain more than eighteen
appointments.

8. To unite two or more circuits stations or missions together, for
Quarterly Conference purposes, allowing the financial interests and
pastoral duties of each to remain separate and independent; and to
divide a circuit, station, or mission into two or more, when he judges
it necessary.

9. To spend at least six months annually from charge to charge, through
out his Episcopal District, in order to preach, and to oversee the
spiritual and temporal affairs of the Church.

10. To organize Annual Conferences in the interval of the General
Conference, when in his judgment it seems wise to do so; and to see that
one clerical and one lay delegate be elected from such Conference to the
General Conference, according to the provision of the second
"Restrictive Rule."

11. To appoint one of their number to preach the quadrennial sermon
before the General Conference on the day of its opening.

12. They shall divide the entire Church into Districts, according to the
number of active Bishops.

13. The Bishops shall choose their own work.

14. They shall change their Districts at least every four years.

15. Any Bishop elected since 1873 shall be automatically retired at the
General Conference nearest his seventieth birthday.

16. No Bishop shall be treasurer or custodian of an Educational or
General Church moneys.

17. A Bishop shall not raise or cause to be raised, collect or cause to
be collected, or receive any public donations from any Annual Conference
or Conferences in the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church.

18. The Bishop shall be President of the Board of Trustees of all
schools and colleges located in his district.




 CHAPTER IX.
 PRESIDING ELDERS


Ques. 1. What are the duties of a Presiding Elder?

Ans. 1. To travel through his appointed District, in order to preach and
superintend the spiritual and temporal affairs of the Church.

2. In the absence of the Bishop, to take charge of all the traveling and
local preachers, and exhorters, in his District.

3. To change, receive, and suspend preachers in his District during the
intervals of the Conferences, and in the absence of the Bishop, as the
Discipline directs.

4. To be present, as far as practicable, at all the quarterly meetings,
and call together the members of the Quarterly Conference, over which he
shall also preside.

5. To decide all questions of law which may come up in the regular
business of the Quarterly or District Conferences, when submitted to him
in writing, subject to an appeal to the President of the next Annual
Conference; but in all cases the application of law shall be with the
Quarterly or District Conferences, which shall record in its journal all
such questions and decisions.

6. To take care that every part of the Discipline be enforced in his
District; to promote, by all proper means, the cause of the Epworth
League, Church Extension, missions and Sunday-schools, and the
publication, at our own press, of tracts and Sunday school books; to
inquire carefully at each Quarterly Conference, whether the rules
respecting the instruction of children have been faithfully observed;
and to report to the Annual Conference the names of all delinquent
traveling preachers within his District.

7. To attend the Bishops when present in his District; and to give them,
when absent, all necessary information by letter, of the state of his
District.

8. To direct the candidates for the ministry to those studies
recommended for them by the Bishops.

9. To procure at the fourth Quarterly Conference full statistics from
every charge, to be reported at the Annual Conference, in case the
preacher in charge fails to make his report.

10. If any preacher absents himself from his circuit, the Presiding
Elder shall, as far as possible, fill his place with another preacher.

Ques. 2. Shall the Presiding Elder have the power to employ a preacher
who has been rejected at the previous Annual Conference?

Ans. He shall not, unless the Conference should give him liberty under
certain conditions.




 CHAPTER X.
 PASTORS AND THEIR DUTIES


Ques. 1. What are the duties of a preacher who has the charge of a
circuit, station, or mission?

Ans. 1. To receive, try, and expel members, according to the provisions
of the Discipline, and to subscribe for the Christian Index. Any
minister failing to subscribe for the same shall be guilty of neglect of
duty.

2. To appoint all the leaders, and change them when he sees it
necessary.

3. To see that all the ordinances and regulations of the Church be duly
observed, and that the General Rules be read at least once a year in
every congregation.

4. To see that a fast be held in every congregation within his charge on
the Friday preceding every quarterly meeting, and that suitable services
be held on the occasion, wherever practicable.

5. To hold Quarterly Conferences in the absence of the Presiding Elder.

6. To hold a meeting of the leaders and stewards of his charge once a
week, if practicable, to receive their reports.

7. To report at each Quarterly Conference the names of all who have been
received into the Church, and of all who have died, removed, withdrawn,
or been excluded from it during the preceding quarter, and give a
statement of the general condition of his station, circuit, or mission.

8. To give an account of his charge every quarter to his Presiding
Elder.

9. To see that all the people within the bounds of his charge be duly
supplied with our books and periodicals.

10. To keep a directory, in which the residence of all the members shall
be noted, wherever it may be necessary to facilitate pastoral
visitation.

11. To leave his successor a particular account of his charge including
an account of the subscribers for our periodicals.

12. To see that a permanent record be kept of all the baptisms and
marriages within the bounds of his charge.

13. To see that a register be kept, in which shall be noted the names,
with the time and manner of the reception and disposal of every person
belonging to the Church in his station, circuit, or mission,
distinguishing between local elders, deacons and preachers, and lay
members; and to report to the Annual Conference the number of each that
may be under his charge at the time of its session.

14. To promote all the interests of the Sunday School, Epworth League,
Church Extension, Board of Missions, Superannuated Preachers, Widows,
and Orphans of Preachers Society, and the Tract Society of our Church in
such a way as the Discipline and Annual Conference may direct, and to
report to the Annual Conference the amount raised in his charge during
the year for these several claims.

15. To see that reports are made at each session of the Quarterly
Conference of the number and state of the Sunday School, Epworth League,
and Woman's Missionary Society, and that the report of the work for the
year in the above named departments be sent to the fourth Quarterly
Conference and the Annual Conference.

16. To furnish every one removing from his charge with a certificate in
the following form:

 CERTIFICATE OF TRANSFER

 The bearer hereof................
 is an acceptable member of the Colored
 Methodist Episcopal Church....
 .........station ........... Annual
 Conference, and is hereby cheerfully
 recommended to the fellowship of any
 body of Christian believers with whom
 ...............may cast.........lot.

 ............Pastor.
 ............Sec'ty of Church.




 CHAPTER XI.
 ADMITTING ON TRIAL AND INTO FULL CONNECTION.
 ELECTION TO DEACON'S AND ELDER'S ORDERS.


I. ADMITTING PREACHERS ON TRIAL

Ques. How is a preacher to be admitted on trial into the traveling
connection?

Ans. 1. By the Annual Conference. In the interval of the Conference, he
may be received and employed in the work by a Bishop, or the Presiding
Elder of the District, until the sitting of the Conference.

2. No one shall be admitted on trial unless he procures a recommendation
from the Quarterly Conference; nor shall a vote be taken upon the
admission of any candidate who shall not have passed an approved
examination upon the course of study prescribed by the Bishops, before a
committee appointed by the Bishop for the purpose.

3. The Annual Conference may then admit him as a probationer by a vote
of the majority. Observe taking on trial is entirely different from
admitting a preacher into full connection. One on trial may be, either
admitted or rejected without doing him any wrong; otherwise it would be
no trial at all.


II. ADMITTING PREACHERS INTO FULL CONNECTION

Ques. Who shall be admitted into the Conference in full connection?

Ans. 1. No one except a preacher who has been employed two successive
years in the regular itinerant work, (which is to commence from his
being admitted on trial at the Annual Conference,) and who is approved
by the Annual Conference.

2. Before any preacher is admitted into full connection, he shall have
passed an approved examination upon the Course of Study prescribed by
the Bishops for candidates for the ministry; and in no case shall a vote
be taken to admit any one until he is recommended by the examining
committee.

3. A missionary employed on a foreign mission may be admitted into full
connection, if recommended by the superintendent of the mission where he
labors, without being present at the Annual Conference for examination.

Ques. 2. What method do we use in admitting a preacher into full
connection at the Conference?

Ans. After solemn fasting and prayer, every person proposed shall then
be asked before the Conference the following questions, (with any,
others which may be thought necessary), namely: Have you faith in
Christ? Are you going on to perfection? Are you groaning after it? Are
you resolved to devote yourself wholly to God and his work? Are you
willing to conform to the Discipline of the Church? Will you diligently
instruct the children in every place? Will you visit from house to
house? Will you recommend fasting, or abstinence, both by precept and
example? Will you especially observe the following directions?—

 1. Be diligent. Never be unemployed. Never be triflingly employed.
 Never trifle away time; neither spend any more time at any place than
 is strictly necessary.

 2. Be punctual. Do every thing exactly at the time. And do not mend our
 rules, but keep them; not for wrath, but conscience's sake.

 3. Act in all things not according to your own will, but as a son in
 the gospel. It is therefore your duty to employ your time in the manner
 which we direct; in preaching, meeting the classes, visiting from house
 to house, and especially visiting the sick; in reading, meditation and
 prayer. Above all, if you labor with us in the Lord's vineyard, it is
 needful you should do that part of the work which we advise at those
 times and places which we judge best for his glory.

 If he gives satisfactory answers to these questions, the Conference, by
 a vote of the majority, may admit him into full connection.


III. ELECTION TO DEACON'S ORDERS

Ques. 1. How is a deacon constituted?

Ans. 1. By the election of a majority of the Annual Conference, and the
laying on of the hands of a Bishop.

2. Before any traveling preacher is ordained deacon, he shall have
passed an approved examination upon the Course of Study prescribed by
the Bishops for candidates for the ministry; and in no case shall a vote
be taken to elect any one to deacon's orders until he is recommended by
the examining committee.

Ques. 2. What shall be the time of probation of a traveling preacher for
the office of a deacon?

Ans. No one shall be so elected and ordained who has not been one year
in the regular itinerant work, except such as may be selected by the
Bishop for missionary work, when the Annual Conference shall have
authority to elect to the deacon's office sooner, if the Conference
judge it expedient.

Ques. 3. What are the duties of a Traveling Deacon?

Ans. 1. To administer baptism and to perform the office of matrimony, in
the absence of the Elder.

2. To assist the Elder in administering the Lord's Supper.

3. To do all the duties of a traveling preacher.


IV. ELECTION OF DEACONS TO ELDER'S ORDERS.

Ques. 1. How is an Elder constituted?

Ans. 1. By the election of a majority of the Annual Conference, and the
laying on of the hands of a Bishop and some of the Elders that are
present.

2. Before any traveling preacher is ordained Elder, he shall have passed
an approved examination upon the Course of Study prescribed by the
Bishops for candidates for all the ministry; and in no case shall a vote
be taken to elect any one to Elder's Orders until he is recommended by
the examining committee.

Ques. 2. What shall be the time of probation of a traveling deacon for
the office of an Elder?

Ans. Every traveling deacon shall exercise that office for two years,
before he is eligible to the office of Elder; except in the case of
missionaries, when the Annual Conference shall have authority to elect
to the Elder's office sooner, if the Conference judge it expedient;

=Provided=, always, that when a preacher has passed his examination, and
been elected to deacon's orders, but fails of his ordination through the
absence of a Bishop, his eligibility to the office of Elder shall run
from the time of his election to the office of Deacon.

Ques. 3. What are the duties of a traveling Elder?

Ans. 1. To administer baptism and the Lord's Supper and to perform the
rite of matrimony, and conduct all parts of Divine worship.

2. To do all the duties of a traveling preacher.




 CHAPTER XII.
 SUPERNUMERARY AND SUPERANNUATED PREACHERS—
 PREACHERS FROM OTHER CHURCHES


I. SUPERNUMERARY PREACHERS

Ques. What is a supernumerary preacher?

Ans. 1. A supernumerary preacher is one who is so disabled by affliction
as to be unable to preach constantly, but is willing to do any work in
the ministry which the Bishop may direct, and he may be able to perform.

2. A supernumerary preacher who refuses to attend to the work assigned
him, unless in case of sickness or other unavoidable cause or causes,
shall not be allowed to exercise the functions of his office, nor even
to preach among us; nevertheless, the final determination of the case
shall be with the Annual Conference of which he is a member, which shall
have power to acquit, suspend, locate, or expel him, as the case may be.


II. SUPERANNUATED PREACHERS.

Ques. What is a superannuated preacher?

Ans. 1. A superannuated preacher is one who is worn out in the itinerant
service.

2. A superannuated preacher, living out of the bounds of the Conference
of which he is a member, shall be held responsible to the Annual
Conference within whose bounds he may reside, which shall have power to
try, acquit, suspend or expel him, in the same manner as if he were a
member of said Conference.


III. RECEIVING PREACHERS FROM OTHER CHURCHES

Ques. 1. How shall we receive those ministers who may offer to unite
with us from other Christian Churches?

Ans. 1. Ministers of other Churches who may desire to unite with us as
local preachers, may be received by a Quarterly Conference, upon giving
satisfaction that they are suitable persons; but they shall not exercise
the peculiar functions of deacons or elders until their orders are
recognized by the Annual Conference:

=Provided=, no one who has been expelled from the ministry and
membership of another Church shall be permitted to enter our itinerancy
under five years from date of said expulsion.

=Provided=, that the Bishop may, at his discretion, allow ministers thus
received to exercise their functions as Deacons or Elders until the
session of the Annual Conference.

2. After such reception, and a recommendation by the Quarterly
Conference, the Annual Conference, if satisfied of their being in order,
and of their agreement with us in doctrine and discipline, and also of
their gifts, graces and usefulness, may recognize them accordingly,
without the re-imposition of hands, on condition of their taking upon
them our ordination vows. If they cannot attend the Annual Conference,
they shall send up a certified subscription to our doctrines and
discipline, and to our ordination vows.

3. Ministers of other Churches, duly accredited as Deacons or Elders,
who may desire to unite with us as traveling preachers, may be admitted
as Deacons or Elders in full connection, after they shall have been
members of the Quarterly Conference at least one year, and procuring a
recommendation from the Quarterly Conference: =provided=, the Conference
is satisfied with their gifts, graces and usefulness, and their
agreement with us in doctrine and discipline, on condition of their
taking upon them our ordination vows, without the re-imposition of
hands.

4. When a minister has been received and recognized in orders, he shall
be furnished with a certificate, signed by one of our Bishops, in the
following words, viz:

 This is to certify that..............
 has been admitted into...............
 Conference as a traveling preacher (or
 has been received as a local preacher
 on........................Circuit),
 he having been ordained to the office
 of a deacon, (or elder, as the case
 may be,) according to the usages of
 the.................Church, of which
 he has been a member and minister;
 and he is hereby authorized to exercise
 the functions pertaining to his office
 in the Colored Methodist Episcopal
 Church in America so long as his
 life and conversation are such as become
 the gospel of Christ.

 Given under my hand and seal, at
 ......this..........day of........in
 the year of our Lord.........




 =PART IV.=
 LOCAL PREACHERS, EXHORTERS, AND OFFICERS OF THE CHURCH




 CHAPTER XIII.
 THE CALL TO PREACH


Ques. 1. How shall we try those who profess to be moved by the Holy
Ghost to preach?

Ans. Let the following questions be asked, namely:

1. Do they know God as a pardoning God? Have they the love of God
abiding in them? Do they desire nothing but God? And are they holy in
all manner of conversation?

2. Have they gifts (as well as graces) for the work? Have they (in some
tolerable degree) a clear, sound understanding, a right judgment in the
things of God, a just conception of salvation by faith? Do they speak
justly, readily, clearly?

3. Have they fruit? Are any truly convinced of sin and converted to God
by their preaching?

As long as these three marks concur in any one, we believe he is called
of God to preach. These we receive as sufficient proof that he is moved
by the Holy Ghost.




 CHAPTER XIV.
 LOCAL PREACHERS AND EXHORTERS


I. LOCAL PREACHERS

Ques. 1. What directions are given concerning the licensing of persons
to preach?

Ans. 1. The Quarterly Conference shall have authority to license proper
persons to preach, and to renew their license annually, when, in its
judgment, their gifts, graces and usefulness will warrant it.

2. No person shall be licensed to preach without the recommendation of
the Church of which he or she is a member, or of the Leaders' Meeting of
the charge to which he or she belongs. Nor shall any one be licensed to
preach without first being examined in the Quarterly Conference on the
subject of doctrines and discipline, and giving satisfactory evidence of
his or her ability to read the word of God; nor shall any license be
valid unless signed by the President and Secretary of the Conference.

Ques. 2. What shall be the time of probation of a local preacher for the
office of a deacon?

Ans. A local preacher shall be eligible to the office of a deacon after
he has preached four years from the time he received a regular license,
and has obtained a recommendation from the Quarterly Conference, on a
proper examination, signed by the President and Secretary, and after his
character has passed, and he has obtained the approbation of the Annual
Conference.

Ques. 3. What shall be the time of probation of a local deacon for the
office of an elder?

Ans. A local deacon shall be eligible to the office of an elder after he
has preached four years from the time he was ordained a deacon, and has
obtained a recommendation from the Quarterly Conference, on a proper
examination, certifying his qualifications in doctrine, discipline,
talents and usefulness, signed by the President and Secretary. He shall
present to the Annual Conference such recommendation, with a note
certifying his belief in the doctrine and discipline of our Church—the
whole being examined by the Annual Conference; and if approved, he may
be ordained.

Ques. 4. What further directions are given concerning local preachers?

Ans. 1. It shall be the duty of local preachers to aid the preacher in
charge of the circuit, station, or mission to which they belong in
supplying the people with the ministry of the word. They shall subscribe
annually for the Christian Index, and their license shall not be renewed
by the Quarterly Conference until they shall have subscribed for the
same. They shall accordingly be applied to by the preacher in charge as
soon as he enters his work, to state what amount of service they are
able and willing to perform; he may then draw up a plan by which their
labors shall be regulated. They shall be authorized to form new
congregations, to take a list of the names of all candidates for Church
membership, and, if expedient, receive them into the Church;
=provided=, that all such congregations, candidates, and members be
reported as soon as possible to the preacher in charge, in order that
they may be placed immediately under his pastoral care.

2. Every local elder, deacon, and licentiate shall have his name
recorded on the Journal of the Quarterly Conference of which he is a
member.

3. When any traveling preacher is located he shall be amenable to the
Quarterly Conference of the charge last filled by him, until he presents
his certificate of location to some other Quarterly Conference.

4. When a local elder, deacon or licentiate removes from one circuit,
station or mission, to another, he shall procure from the Presiding
Elder of the District or from the Preacher having charge, a certificate
of his official standing in the Church at the time of his removal;
without which he shall not be received as a local preacher in other
places.


II. EXHORTERS

Ques. 1. What directions are given concerning the licensing of persons
to exhort?

Ans. 1. The Quarterly Conference shall have authority to license proper
persons to exhort, and to renew their license annually, when, in its
judgment, their gifts, graces and usefulness will warrant it.

2. No person shall be licensed to exhort without the recommendation of
the Church of which he is a member, or of the Leaders' Meeting of the
charge to which he belongs; nor shall any license be valid unless signed
by the President of the Conference.

Ques. 2. What are the duties of an exhorter?

Ans. To hold meetings for prayer and exhortation whenever opportunity is
afforded, subject to the direction of the preacher in charge.

Ques. 3. What further directions are given concerning exhorters?

Ans. 1. Let every exhorter diligently exercise the functions of his
office without assuming those of a preacher.

2. Every exhorter, by virtue of his office, shall be a member of the
Quarterly Conference of the charge to which he belongs; but in all other
respects he shall be dealt with as a private member of the Church.

3. When an exhorter removes from one circuit, station or mission to
another, he shall not be recognized as such unless he obtains a
certificate of his official character from the Presiding Elder of the
District, or the preacher to whose charge he belongs at the time of his
removal.




 CHAPTER XV.
 CLASS LEADERS


Ques. 1. How are the class leaders to be appointed?

Ans. By the preacher in charge, who shall appoint one person in each
class to be the leader thereof.

Ques. 2. What are the regulations concerning the class leaders?

Ans. 1. Let them be men of sound judgment and truly devoted to God.

2. Let every one of them be carefully examined by the preacher in charge
at least once a quarter, concerning his method of leading his class.

3. It is the leader's duty—

 (1) To see each person in his class once a week, at least, in order to
 inquire how their souls prosper; to advise, reprove, comfort, or
 exhort, as occasion may require; to receive what they are willing to
 give toward the support of the preacher in charge and for the relief of
 the poor.[4]

 (2) To meet the ministers and the stewards of the society once a week
 in order—

  To inform the minister of any that are sick, or of any that walk
  disorderly and will not be reproved.

  To pay the stewards what they have received of their several classes
  in the week preceding =provided=, the leaders collect from each member
  5c per week, class dues.

[Footnote 4: This part refers to towns and cities where the poor are
generally numerous and Church expenses considerable.]




 CHAPTER XVI.
 STEWARDS AND STEWARDESSES


Ques. 1. How are Stewards and Junior Stewards to be appointed?

Ans. The preacher in charge shall have the right of nomination, subject
to the confirmation or rejection of the Quarterly Conference.

Ques. 2. What are the regulations concerning Stewards and Junior
Stewards?

Ans. 1. Let them be men of solid piety, who both know and love the
Methodist doctrine and discipline, and of good natural and acquired
ability to transact temporal business of the Church.

2. It shall be the duty of the Stewards to make estimates of expenses
and provision for the support of the gospel; to take an exact account of
all moneys collected or other provisions made for the support of the
ministry; expenditure of money, whether for the support of the ministry
or the relief of the sick, or the poor; to seek the needy and distressed
in order to relieve and comfort them; to inform the preachers of any
sick or disorderly persons; to tell the preachers what they think wrong
in them; to attend the official meetings and the quarterly meetings; to
give advice, if asked, in planning the circuit; to attend committees for
the application of money to churches; to give counsel in matters of
arbitration; to provide elements for the Lord's Supper; to appoint some
one, whenever necessary, to receive contributions for the support of the
ministry and other purposes, and to obtain from each collector thus
appointed the money received by him, that it may be reported to the
Quarterly Conference; to take up collections quarterly in every
congregation, if it be necessary, and to write circular letters to the
societies to be more liberal, if need be; and to let them know, when
occasion requires, the financial state of the Church, as reported at the
Quarterly Conference. They shall elect their own chairman, secretary and
treasurer.

3. The Stewards of each circuit and station shall be a standing
committee (where there is no parsonage) to provide houses for the
families of married preachers, or to assist the preachers to obtain
houses for themselves when they are appointed to labor among them.

Ques. 3. To whom are Stewards accountable for the faithful performance
of their duties?

Ans. To the Quarterly Conference, which shall have power to remove them
from office.

Ques. 4. What shall be the number of Stewards in each circuit or
station?

Ans. 1. Every pastoral charge shall be entitled to one Steward for every
thirty members, to be elected annually: =provided=, nevertheless, that
each society in a circuit shall have one Steward, and each circuit or
station may have at least seven.

2. When two or more circuits or stations are united, the Stewards shall
hold office till the first Quarterly Conference elects a new Board.

Ques. 5. What directions are given concerning Junior Stewards?

Ans. They shall be auxiliary to Stewards and their number and manner of
election shall be the same.

Ques. 6. What are the duties of a Recording Steward?

Ans. To preserve the records of the Quarterly Conference, and to report
to the Joint Board of Finance of the Annual Conference a full account of
the acts of his Board of Stewards the preceding year.

Ques. 7. What are the regulations concerning Stewardesses and Junior
Stewardesses?

Ans. There shall be a Board of Stewardesses and Junior Stewardesses in
each circuit, station or mission, whose number and mode of election
shall be the same as Stewards.

2. Junior Stewardesses shall be auxiliary to Stewardesses.

3. It shall be the duty of the Stewardesses to serve the table of the
Lord, the table of the poor, and the table of the ministry; to assist in
the collection of the General Funds, Presiding Elder's and Pastor's
salary, and to do any other work that may be assigned to them by the
pastor in charge or Board of Stewards of the Church.




 CHAPTER XVII.
 TRUSTEES OF CHURCH PROPERTY


Ques. 1. How are Trustees to be appointed?

Ans. Except where the laws of the State or Territory provide
differently, the Preacher in Charge, or, in his absence, the Presiding
Elder, shall have the right of nomination, subject to the confirmation
or rejection of the Quarterly Conference.

Ques. 2. What are the regulations concerning the Trustees?

Ans. 1. No person shall be eligible as a Trustee of any of our
parsonages or churches who is not a member of our Church, and at least
twenty-one years of age.

2. All vacancies in the Board of Trustees, occasioned by death,
resignation, or otherwise, shall be filled without delay.

3. Let nine Trustees be appointed for holding Church property, when
proper persons can be procured, otherwise, seven, five, or three, who
shall elect their own chairman, secretary, and treasurer.

4. The Board or Boards of Trustees of every circuit, station, or
mission, shall be members of, and responsible to, the Quarterly
Conference of the same, which shall have power to dismiss any of them
from office; and shall be required to present a report of their acts, at
least once a year, to the Quarterly Conference.

5. No person who is a Trustee shall be ejected while he is in joint
security for money, unless such relief be given him as is demanded, or
the creditor will accept.




 =PART V.=
 CHURCH MEMBERSHIP, ORDER OF WORSHIP, MEANS OF GRACE,
 CHILDREN, AND SUNDAY-SCHOOL




 CHAPTER XVIII.
 HOW TO RECEIVE MEMBERS.


Ques. How shall members be received into the Church?

Ans. 1. When persons offer themselves for Church-membership, let the
preacher in charge inquire into their spiritual condition, and receive
them into the Church when they have given satisfactory assurances of
their desire to flee from the wrath to come, and to be saved from their
sins; and also, of the genuineness of their faith, and of their
willingness to keep the rules of the Church.

2. When satisfied on these points, let the minister bring the candidates
before the congregation, whenever practicable, and receive them
according to the prescribed form.

3. If a member in good standing in any other Church shall desire to
unite with us, such applicant may, by giving satisfactory answers to the
usual inquiries be received without these formalities.




 CHAPTER XIX.
 ORDER AND DIRECTIONS FOR PUBLIC WORSHIP


Ques. 1. What directions are given for uniformity in public worship?

Ans. 1. The morning service shall be conducted in the following order:

ORDER OF PUBLIC WORSHIP

 1. Organ voluntary or song.

 2. Singing, congregation standing.

 3. Repeating "Apostles' Creed."

 4. Prayer—closing with Lord's prayer, repeated or chanted.

 5. Singing—anthem or hymn.

 6. Reading lessons out of the Old and the New Testament—with chant by
 choir or suitable song between the lessons.

 7. Announcements and notices.

 8. Singing—congregation sitting.

 9. Preaching.

 10. Singing—congregation standing.

 11. Prayer.

 12. Doxology and benediction.

2. The afternoon and evening services shall be the same as the morning,
except that one of the lessons, or both, may be omitted, at the
discretion of the minister.

3. The Lord's Supper shall be administered monthly, in every
congregation, wherever it is practicable; and where it is not, at every
quarterly meeting. Let the service preceding the administration be so
proportioned as to admit of due time for this solemn ordinance.

4. Let the Lord's Prayer be used on all occasions of public worship, in
concluding the first morning prayer, the congregation repeating after
the minister; and the apostolic benediction (2 Cor. xiii. 14) in
dismissing the congregation.

5. The Ritual shall be invariably used in all the offices for which it
is prescribed.

Ques. 2. How shall we guard against formality in singing?

Ans. 1. By choosing such hymns as are proper for the occasion.

2. By not singing too much at once; seldom more than five or six verses.

3. By suiting the tune to the words.

4. By often stopping short, when the words are given out, and asking the
people: "Now, do you know what you said last? Did you speak no more than
you felt?"

5. In all our congregations let the people learn to sing, and use our
own Hymn and Tune Books.

6. Exhort every person in the congregation to sing.




 CHAPTER XX.
 OTHER MEETINGS OF THE CHURCH


I. PRAYER MEETINGS

Ques. What directions are given concerning our prayer meetings?

Ans. Let the pastor hold prayer-meetings, weekly, in every church where
it is practicable; and when he cannot himself attend, let him engage
local preachers, exhorters, class-leaders, and others, to hold them.

2. Let prayer-meetings be held also at other places where there is a
probability of their doing good.


II. CLASS MEETINGS

Ques. 1. What directions are given concerning class-meetings?

Ans. 1. Let the membership of every church, wherever it is practicable,
be divided into smaller companies, called classes, according to their
respective places of abode; and let the members be exhorted to attend
the meetings of the same.

2. Two or more classes may meet at the same time and place, at their own
option, and their leaders may alternate in conducting the exercises.

3. The pastor shall visit every class once a quarter, and report its
condition to the Quarterly Conference; and let him hold general
class-meetings as often as he shall find it expedient.

Ques. 2. Can any thing be done in order to make the class-meetings more
profitable?

Ans. 1. Change improper leaders.

2. Let the leaders frequently meet each other's classes.

3. Let us observe which leaders are the most useful; and let these meet
the other classes as often as possible.


III. LOVE-FEASTS

Ques. 1. What directions are given concerning love-feasts?

Ans. 1. Love-feasts shall be held quarterly, or at such other times as
the preacher in charge may consider expedient, with closed doors, to
which, besides Church members, other serious persons may be admitted by
him.

2. In conducting the love-feast, after singing and prayer, the preacher
may make a short address, setting forth the nature and design of this
institution; every one present then partakes of a little bread and water
in token of brotherly love; the members then give brief details of their
religious experience; and the meeting is closed with singing and prayer.

Ques. 2. How often shall we permit strangers to be present at our
love-feasts?

Ans. Let them be admitted with the utmost caution; and the same person
on no account above twice or thrice.




 CHAPTER XXI.
 CHILDREN OF THE CHURCH


Ques. What directions are given concerning the children of the Church?

Ans. 1. Let the minister diligently instruct and exhort all parents to
dedicate their children to the Lord in baptism as early as convenient.

2. In his pastoral visitations let him pay special attention to the
children; speak to them personally and kindly on experimental and
practical godliness, according to their capacity; pray earnestly for
them, and cause them to be faithfully instructed in the nature, design,
privileges, and obligations of their baptism.

3. As soon as they comprehend the responsibilities involved in a public
profession of faith in Christ, and give evidence of a sincere and
earnest determination to discharge the same, see that they be duly
recognized as members of the Church, agreeably to the provisions of the
Discipline.

4. Let our Catechisms be used as extensively as possible, both in our
Sunday-schools and families; and let the preachers faithfully enforce
upon parents and Sunday-school teachers the great importance of
instructing children in the doctrines and duties of our holy religion.

5. It shall be the special duty of the preachers to form Bible-classes
wherever they can, for the instruction of larger children and youth; and
where they cannot superintend them personally, to appoint suitable
leaders for that purpose.




 CHAPTER XXII.
 THE SUNDAY-SCHOOL


Ques. What directions are given concerning Sunday-schools?

Ans. 1. Let Sunday-schools be formed in all our congregations, where ten
children can be collected for that purpose. And it shall be the especial
duty of preachers having charge of circuits and stations, with the aid
of the other preachers, to see that this be done; to engage the
co-operation of as many of our members as they can; to visit the schools
as often as practicable; to preach on the subject of Sunday-schools and
religious instruction in each congregation; to have the Superintendents
lay before the Quarterly Conference, at each quarterly meeting, to be
entered on its journal, a written statement of the number and state of
the Sunday-schools within their respective circuits and stations, and to
make a report of the same to their several Annual Conferences.

2. Each Quarterly Conference shall be deemed a Board of Managers, having
supervision of all the Sunday-school Societies within its limits.

3. It is recommended that each Annual Conference, where the general
state of the work will allow, request the appointment of a special
agent, to travel throughout its bounds, for the purpose of promoting the
interests of Sunday-schools and his expenses shall be paid out of
collections which he shall be directed to make, or otherwise, as shall
be ordered by the Conference.

4. Let our Catechisms be used as extensively as possible in our
Sunday-schools; and let the preachers faithfully enforce upon
Sunday-school teachers the great importance of instructing children in
the doctrines and duties of our holy religion.

5. The Superintendent of the Sunday-school shall be nominated by the
preacher in charge, subject to the confirmation or rejection of the
Quarterly Conference.




 =PART VI.=
 JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION




 CHAPTER XXIII.
 TRIAL CODE OF A BISHOP


Ques. 1. To whom is a Bishop amenable for his conduct?

Ans. 1. To the General Conference which has power to try him for
improper conduct and to acquit, suspend, reprimand, retire with or
without salary or expel him.

Ques. 2. What provision is made for the trial of a Bishop if he be
accused of immorality in the interval of the General Conference?

Ans 2. When a bishop shall be under a report or be accused of
immorality, three traveling elders shall, after notice to him, carefully
inquire into the case and if they believe an investigation necessary,
they shall report the matter to another bishop—and it shall be his duty
to call together at some convenient place not fewer than twelve (12)
traveling elders— and also the witnesses by whom the accusation is
expected to be established, and the said elders shall be a committee for
the investigation of the charge against the Bishop.

If the majority of them believe a trial necessary, they shall suspend
him until the next General Conference.

The presiding Bishop shall cause an exact record of the investigation,
signed by the president and secretary, to be transmitted to the General
Conference. By this record and such other testimony as may be obtained,
the case shall be considered and determined by the General Conference
without the intervention of another committee. But in no case shall the
inquiring elders be recognized as the accusers, but the three elders
afore-mentioned must act wholly upon rumors and not personal knowledge,
and shall not take any further part in the case.

Ques. 3. What provision is made for the appeal of a Bishop who may be
suspended during the interval of the General Conference?

Ans. 3. There shall be a court of appeals composed of fifteen (15)
persons appointed as follows: Two by each Bishop and one by the fourteen
(14) appointed by the Bishops—one of the Bishops shall be ex-officio
president of said court. The number composing said court shall be
increased at the same ratio as the number of Bishops may be increased
until the number composing the court shall reach twenty-five (25), to
which all appeals shall be made by the accused who may have been
suspended in the interval of the General Conference; said court shall
have the power to sustain the action of the investigating committee,
reverse and remand, or reverse and dismiss. In all cases their decisions
shall be final except when the action of the investigating committee is
sustained by it.

In said excepted case, the suspension remains until the ensuing General
Conference.

The Bishop appointed to preside over said court is hereby authorized,
upon the receipt of an appeal, from the decision of any committee of
investigation, to cause to be appointed the fifteen (15) members as
above stated, which said number will sit as an appellate court as before
stated at a place most convenient to all parties concerned.

But should an appeal reach the Bishop within three months of the sitting
of the General Conference, the court shall not be convened—but the case
takes its regular course.

Ques. 4. What provision is made for the trial of a Bishop if he should
be accused during the session of the General Conference?

Ans. 1. An accusation preferred during the session of the General
Conference shall be referred for investigation to a committee of
twenty-five (25) members of the General Conference to be selected by the
president. Of this number, the accused shall have the right of challenge
for fifteen (15) of the twenty-five (25) appointed by the Bishop or
president—and the committee shall report to the General Conference
whether or not a trial is necessary.

If the committee of investigation decides that a trial is necessary,
they shall formulate charges and specifications conforming them with the
grade of offense involved in the accusation and shall appoint one or
more of their number to prosecute the case.

The bill of charges and specifications shall be a part of the report of
the committee to the General Conference. Every case to be tried under
this process, shall, upon finding of a bill of charges, be referred to
the Committee on Episcopacy, who shall have full power to try the case
and whose decision shall be final save as to the right of appeal.

The said committee shall make a written report to the General Conference
and deliver to the secretary the whole record of the case with the
decision rendered.

2. A Bishop who shall be found guilty by the committee on Episcopacy
shall have the right to appeal to the General Conference then in session
which shall finally determine the case.

3. No charge against a Bishop shall be tried unless it be made in
writing with specifications signed by the accusers—and a copy of the
charge with the specifications shall be delivered to the accused in
sufficient time before the trial to enable him to make all necessary
preparation for his defense.




 CHAPTER XXIV.
 TRIAL OF A TRAVELING PREACHER


Ques. 1. To whom is a traveling preacher amenable for his conduct?

Ans. To the Annual Conference, which shall have power to try, acquit, or
expel him.

Ques. 2. What shall be done when a traveling preacher is accused of
immorality?

Ans. 1. When a traveling elder or deacon is under report of being guilty
of some crime expressly forbidden in the Word of God, if it be in the
interval of the Annual Conference, let the Presiding Elder, in the
absence of the Bishop, call as many traveling preachers as he shall
think fit—at least three—and, if possible, bring the accused and the
accuser face to face. If the accused be clearly convicted, he shall be
suspended till the ensuing Annual Conference. The Presiding Elder shall
cause an exact record of the investigation, signed by the President and
Secretary, to be transmitted to the Annual Conference, by which his case
shall be fully considered and determined.

If the accused be a Presiding Elder, any three traveling Elders or
Deacons of his District may inquire into the case, and if they judge it
necessary report to the Bishop, who shall appoint a committee of at
least three Elders, from within the bounds of the Annual Conference of
which the accused is a member; he shall also preside at the
investigation, or some traveling Elder appointed by him; and the
accused, if guilty, shall be suspended.

If the accused and the accuser cannot be brought face to face, but the
supposed delinquent evades an investigation, it shall be received as a
presumptive proof of guilt; and out of the mouth of two or three
witnesses he shall be condemned, and be accordingly suspended.
Nevertheless, even in that case, the Annual Conference shall consider
and determine the whole matter.

2. When the accusation is preferred during the session of the Annual
Conference, it shall first be referred to a committee of three traveling
Elders for investigation, who shall report to the Conference whether or
not they judge a trial necessary. If the Conference differ in judgment
from the committee, a new committee may be appointed to inquire into the
facts and report.

The committee of investigation reporting a case for trial, shall bring
forward the bill of charges in proper form and appoint one or more of
their number to prosecute it.

Every case to be tried shall be referred to a committee of not less than
nine, nor more than thirteen, who, in the presence of a Bishop or a
chairman, whom the President of the Conference shall appoint, and one or
more of the Secretaries of the Conference, shall have full power to try
the case, and their decision shall be final, save as to the right of
appeal: =provided=, that the accused shall, upon good grounds
alleged, be allowed to challenge five in a committee of nine, or seven
in a committee of thirteen, and in the same ratio for any other number.
And the said committee shall make a faithful report to the Conference,
in writing, and deliver up to the Secretary the whole record of the
case, with the decision rendered.


Ques. 3. What shall be done in cases of improper tempers, words, or
actions?

Ans. The person so offending shall be reprehended by his senior in
office. Should a second transgression take place, one, two, or three
ministers or preachers are to be taken as witnesses. If he be not then
cured, accusation shall be preferred at the next Annual Conference, and
the accused shall be dealt with as in a case of immorality.

Ques. 4. What shall be done with those ministers or preachers who hold
and disseminate, publicly or privately doctrines which are contrary to
our Articles of Religion?

Ans. Let the same process be observed as in case of immorality; but if
the minister or preacher so offending do solemnly engage not to
disseminate such erroneous doctrines in public or in private, he shall
be borne with till his case be laid before the next Annual Conference,
which shall determine the matter.

Ques. 5. What shall be done when a traveling preacher is complained of
as being so unacceptable, inefficient, or secular, as to be no longer
useful in his work?

Ans. 1. The Conference to which he belongs shall investigate the case,
and if it appears that the complaint is well founded, and he does not
give the Conference satisfaction that he will amend or voluntarily
retire, it may locate him without his consent.

2. He shall be at liberty to defend himself before the Conference in
person, or by his representative; and if he be located in his absence,
without having been previously notified of an intention thus to proceed
against him, he may apply to the Conference, at its next session, to be
heard in his defense, and the matter shall be reconsidered for that
purpose.

Ques. 6. What shall be done in the case of a preacher who refuses to
attend to the work assigned him?

Ans. No Deacon or Elder who ceases to travel without the consent of the
Annual Conference, certified under the hand of the President of the
Conference, except in case of sickness, debility or other unavoidable
circumstances, shall, on any account, exercise the peculiar functions of
his office, or even be allowed to preach among us; but the final
determination in all such cases is with the Annual Conference.

Nevertheless, in all the above mentioned cases of trial and conviction,
an appeal to the Ministerial Court of Appeals shall be allowed, if the
condemned person signifies to the President or the Secretary of the
Conference his intention to appeal at the time of his condemnation; or
at any time within two months thereafter.




 CHAPTER XXV.
 TRIAL OF PROBATIONERS AND LOCAL PREACHERS.


I. TRIAL OF A PROBATIONER

Ques. What shall be done with a preacher on trial who is accused of
immorality?

Ans. He shall be accountable to the Quarterly Conference of the circuit
on which he travels. The Presiding Elder shall call a committee of
investigation, and the course of Discipline shall be pursued that is
made and provided for a Local Preacher under a like accusation.


II. TRIAL OF A LOCAL PREACHER

Ques. 1. To whom is a Local Preacher amenable for his conduct?

Ans. To the Quarterly Conference, which shall have power to try, acquit,
or expel him.

Ques. 2. What shall be done when a Local Preacher is accused of
immorality?

Ans. 1. When a Local Preacher is under report of being guilty of some
crime expressly forbidden in the Word of God, the preacher in charge
shall appoint a committee of three Local Preachers to investigate the
report; and if they judge a trial to be necessary, they shall appoint
one or more of their number to prepare a bill of charges and
specifications, and present it before the ensuing Quarterly Conference.

2. The Committee of Investigation shall, in every case, make a report to
the Quarterly Conference; and if the Conference differs in judgment, a
new committee may be appointed to inquire into the facts and to report.

3. A Local Preacher who has been notified by the Presiding Elder, or
preacher in charge, of a bill of charges and specifications thus found
against him, shall not be allowed to exercise the functions of his
office until the case has been presented to, and determined by, the
Quarterly Conference.

4. The President of the Quarterly Conference, shall at the commencement
of the trial, appoint a Secretary, who shall take down regular minutes
of the evidence and proceedings. The minutes, when read and approved,
shall be signed by the President, and also by the members who are
present, or a majority of them, and the sentence of the Quarterly
Conference shall be pronounced by the President.

Ques. 3. What shall be done in cases of improper tempers, words, or
actions?

Ans. The person so offending shall be reprehended by the preacher having
charge. Should a second transgression take place, one, two, or three
faithful friends are to be taken as witnesses. If he be not then cured,
he shall be dealt with as in a case of immorality; and if found guilty
and impenitent, he shall be expelled from the Church.

Ques. 4. What shall be done with those Local Preachers who hold and
disseminate, publicly or privately, doctrines which are contrary to our
Articles of Religion?

Ans. Let the same process be observed as in a case of immorality.

Ques. 5. What shall be done when a Local Elder or Deacon is complained
of as being so unacceptable or inefficient as to be no longer useful in
his work, and the Quarterly Conference refuses to pass his character on
that ground?

Ans. The Quarterly Conference next succeeding shall proceed to
investigate the case; and if it appears that the complaint is well
founded, and he does not give the Conference satisfaction that he will
amend or voluntarily retire, the Conference may depose him from the
ministry. He shall be at liberty to defend himself before the Conference
in person, or by his representative. The President of the Quarterly
Conference shall have regular minutes of the investigation taken which
on being read and approved, shall be signed by himself and a majority of
the members of the Conference.

Nevertheless, in all the above mentioned cases of trial and conviction,
an appeal to the ensuing Annual Conference shall be allowed, if the
condemned person signifies his intention to appeal at the time of his
condemnation, or at any time thereafter when he is informed thereof.




 CHAPTER XXVI.
 TRIAL OF A MEMBER


Ques. 1. How shall an accused member be brought to trial?

Ans. 1. Before the church of which he is a member, or a select number of
them, in the presence of a Bishop, Elder, Deacon or Preacher, in the
following manner:

 (a) When a member of the Church is under report of being guilty of some
 crime expressly forbidden in the Word of God, the preacher having
 charge shall appoint a committee of three discreet members, who shall
 investigate the report, and if they judge a trial to be necessary, they
 shall appoint one of their number to prepare a bill of charges and
 specifications, and also to prosecute the case.

 (b) Upon the presentation of such bill of charges, the preacher shall
 appoint a committee of not less than five, nor more than thirteen,
 before whom the accused shall be duly cited to appear, who shall have
 full power to try the case; and if the accused be found guilty by a
 majority of the committee, let the preacher declare him suspended or
 expelled. Nevertheless, the preacher may, at his discretion, bring the
 case before the whole Church for trial.

 (c) A copy of the charge and specifications shall be delivered to the
 accused a sufficient length of time before the trial, to enable him to
 make all necessary preparations for his defense; and in case of trial
 before a committee, he shall be allowed, upon good reasons alleged, to
 challenge two in a committee of five, and in like ratio for any other
 number.

 (d) The preacher in charge shall preside at the trial, and decide all
 questions of law appertaining to or growing out of the case. He shall,
 at the commencement of the trial, appoint a secretary, who shall take
 down regular minutes of the evidence and proceedings, which minutes,
 when read and approved, shall be signed by the president and the
 secretary.

 (e) If the accused person evades a trial by absenting himself after
 sufficient notice given him, and the circumstances of the accusation be
 strong and presumptive, let him be esteemed as guilty, and be
 accordingly suspended or expelled. Witnesses from without shall not be
 rejected.

2. But in case of neglect of duties of any kind—imprudent conduct,
indulging sinful tempers or words, dancing, or disobedience to the order
and the Discipline of the Church; First, let private reproof be given by
a preacher or leader; and if there be an acknowledgement of the fault
and proper humiliation, the person may be borne with. On a second
offense, the preacher or leader may take one or two faithful friends. On
a third offense, let the case be brought before the Church, or a select
number; and if there be no sign of real humiliation, the offender must
be cut off.

3. If a member of our Church endeavor to sow dissension in any of our
societies, by inveighing against either our doctrines or Discipline,
such person so offending shall be first reproved by the senior minister
or preacher of his circuit; and if he persist in such pernicious
practices, he shall be expelled from the Church.

Ques. 2. What shall be done in case of disputes between members of the
Church?

Ans. 1. On any dispute between two or more members of our Church,
concerning the payment of debts or otherwise, which cannot be settled by
the parties concerned, the preacher in charge shall inquire into the
circumstances of the case; and shall recommend to the contending parties
a reference, consisting of one arbiter chosen by the plaintiff, and
another chosen by the defendant; which two arbiters so chosen shall
nominate the third—the three arbiters being members of our Church.

2. But if one of the parties be dissatisfied with the judgment given,
such party may apply to the ensuing Quarterly Conference for a second
arbitration; and if the Quarterly Conference see sufficient reason, they
shall grant a =second= arbitration, in which case each party shall
choose two arbiters, and the four arbiters shall choose a fifth, the
judgment of the majority of whom shall be final; and any person refusing
to abide by such judgment shall be excluded from the Church.

3. And if any member of our Church shall refuse, in cases of debt or
other disputes, to refer the matter to arbitration, when recommended by
him who has the charge of the circuit, or shall enter into a lawsuit
with another member before these measures are taken, he shall be
expelled, unless the case be of such a nature as to require and justify
a process of law.

Nevertheless, in all the above mentioned cases of trial and expulsion,
an appeal to the ensuing Quarterly Conference shall be allowed, if the
condemned person signifies to the pastor his intention to appeal at the
time of his condemnation, or at any time thereafter when he is informed
thereof.




 CHAPTER XXVII.
 MINISTERIAL COURT OF APPEALS.


1. Each Annual Conference shall elect every two years beginning with its
first session after the General Conference, three Elders, who shall be
men of experience, judgment and information touching the law of the
Church, to be known as Triers of Appeals.

2. The Ministerial Court of Appeals shall consist of a President, who
shall be a Bishop, and the Triers of Appeals from three Conferences
adjacent to that of which the appellant was a member.

3. The President of the Ministerial Court shall be appointed by the
House of Bishops; but in no case shall they appoint the Bishop who
presided in the Annual Conference which tried the appellant.

4. Should any member of the Ministerial Court of Appeals, become an
appellant to the Court of Appeals, he shall be disqualified to sit as a
member of the said Court; his place declared vacant and another
appointed in his stead.

5. Any member of any Annual Conference who has been tried and convicted
shall have the right to appeal to the Ministerial Court; =provided=, he
signifies to the Bishop of the Conference, his intention so to do within
two months after the action of the Annual Conference.

6. The Secretary of the Annual Conference shall carefully preserve the
record of the proceedings of the trial, all charges and specifications
and documents relating thereto, and shall forward the same to the
President of the Ministerial Court of Appeals as soon as he has been
appointed.

7. The right of peremptory challenge shall not be denied an appellant,
=provided=, the exercise of such challenge does not reduce the members
of the Court below five, which number shall constitute a quorum.

8. The Ministerial Court of Appeals shall elect a Secretary from its own
members to keep a record of its proceedings. In all cases the
proceedings and findings of the Court shall be subject to review by the
General Conference.

9. The appellant or his representative shall state the grounds of his
appeal, and the representative of the lower court shall then be heard.
The charges and specifications and all documents bearing on the case,
together with the minutes of the lower Court, shall be read. The
appellant is then heard in his defense and reply is made by the
representative of the lower Court. When the representatives of the
appellant and the Court below have been heard, they retire and the Court
of Appeals deliberates and decides the case.




 CHAPTER XXVIII.
 APPEAL OF A TRAVELING PREACHER TO THE GENERAL CONFERENCE


1. In all cases, it shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Annual
Conference to preserve the documents relating to the trial of members,
which documents only, in an appeal from the decision of an Annual
Conference, shall be presented to the Ministerial Court of Appeals in
evidence on the case.

2. When an appeal is made from the Ministerial Court of Appeals, and
allowed by the General Conference, there shall be a committee appointed
consisting of one delegate from each Annual Conference, who, in the
presence of a Bishop and one or more of the Secretaries of the General
Conference, shall have full power to try the case; and their decision
shall be final. And the said committee shall make a faithful report to
the General Conference, in writing, and deliver up to the Secretary the
whole record of the case with the decision rendered.

3. No member shall be appointed to serve on any appeal when he has been
a member of the committee that first tried the case.

4. The appellant shall state, either personally or by his representative,
(who shall be a member of the Conference,) the grounds of his appeal,
showing cause why he appeals, and he shall be permitted to make his
defense without interruption. After which the representatives of the
Ministerial Court of Appeals from whose decision the appeal is made
shall be permitted to respond in presence of the appellant, who shall be
at privilege of replying, which shall close the pleadings on both sides.
This done, the appellant shall withdraw and the committee shall decide.

5. No minister, after such form of trial and expulsion, shall be
restored to the communion of the Church without giving satisfactory
evidence of repentance, unless the Annual Conference shall become
convinced that he was innocent of the crime for which he was expelled;
in which case the Conference may restore him to his previous standing.




 CHAPTER XXIX.
 APPEAL OF A LOCAL PREACHER.


1. When an appeal of a Local Preacher is made and allowed by the Annual
Conference, the President shall appoint a committee of not less than
nine nor more than thirteen, who shall have full power to try the case;
and their decision shall be final.

2. No member of the Quarterly Conference that first tried the case shall
be appointed on this committee.

3. The minutes of the trial in the Quarterly Conference shall be laid
before this committee, which documents only shall be in evidence; and
the said committee shall make a faithful report to the Annual Conference
in writing, and deliver up to the Secretary the whole record of the case
with the decision rendered.

4. The appellant shall state, either personally or by his representative
(who shall be a member of the Conference), the grounds of his appeal,
showing cause why he appeals, and he shall be permitted to make his
defense without interruption. After which the representatives of the
Quarterly Conference from whose decision the appeal is made, shall be
permitted to respond in presence of the appellant, who shall have
privilege of replying, which shall close the pleadings on both sides.
This done, the appellant shall withdraw and the committee shall decide.




 CHAPTER XXX.
 APPEAL OF A MEMBER.


1. If there be a murmur or complaint from any excluded person, that
justice has not been done in the trial before the Church or committee,
he shall be allowed an appeal to the next Quarterly Conference.

2. The appeal being made and allowed, the preacher in charge shall
present the minutes of the trial to the Quarterly Conference, from which
minutes the case shall finally be determined.

3. No member of the committee for trial shall vote on the appeal.

4. The appellant shall state, either personally or by his representative,
(who shall be a member of the church) the grounds of his appeal, showing
cause why he appeals, and he shall be permitted to make his defense,
without interruption. After which the representatives of the society or
committee from whose decision the appeal is made, shall be permitted to
respond in presence of the appellant, who shall have privilege of
replying, which shall close the pleadings on both sides. This done, the
appellant shall withdraw, and the majority of the members of the
Quarterly Conference present shall finally determine the case.

5. No member, after such form of trial and expulsion, shall be restored
to the communion of the Church without giving satisfactory evidence of
repentance, unless the Quarterly Conference shall become convinced that
he was innocent of the crime for which he was expelled; in which case he
may be restored.




 CHAPTER XXXI.
 RESTORATION OF CREDENTIALS


I. TRAVELING ELDERS AND DEACONS.

1. When any traveling Elder or Deacon is deprived of his credentials of
ordination by expulsion or otherwise, they shall be filed with the
papers of the Annual Conference of which he was a member.

2. Should he, at any future time, give satisfactory evidence to said
Conference of his amendment or innocence, and procure a certificate of
the Quarterly Conference of the circuit or station where he resides, or
of the Annual Conference which may have admitted him on trial,
recommending him to the Annual Conference, of which he was formerly a
member, the restoration of his credentials, the said Conference may
restore them.


II. LOCAL ELDERS OR DEACONS.

1. When any local Elder or Deacon is deprived of his credentials of
ordination by expulsion or otherwise, it shall be the duty of the
Presiding Elder to require them of him, and to file them with the papers
of the Annual Conference within the limits of which the said Local
Preacher resides.

2. Should he, at any future time, produce to the Annual Conference a
certificate of his restoration by the Quarterly Conference, signed by
the President and Secretary thereof, his credentials may be restored to
him.




 =PART VII.=
 SUPPORT OF THE MINISTRY, BUILDING CHURCHES AND PARSONAGES—
 SECURING AND TRANSFERRING CHURCH PROPERTY




CHAPTER XXXII.


I. SUPPORT OF PASTORS

1. Every minister, who by the rules and usages of the Church is a
claimant on its funds, shall, as far as practicable, have his claim
estimated by those who are to pay it, or by an agent authorized to act
for them.

2. The salary and traveling expenses of preachers on circuits and
stations shall be estimated by their respective Boards of Stewards.

3. The Stewards shall report to each Church meeting the whole amount to
be raised, and that part of it which each congregation is expected to
pay. The Church Conference shall adopt its own method of raising this
money.


II. SUPPORT OF PRESIDING ELDERS

1. The salary and traveling expenses of Presiding Elders shall be
estimated by the Joint Board of Finance.

2. The Joint Board of Finance shall apportion the amount allowed among
the different pastoral charges of the District, whose Boards of Stewards
shall add the sum, thus apportioned, to the amounts agreed on to be
raised for their preachers, and its collection shall be provided for in
the same way.


III. SUPPORT OF BISHOPS

The Bishops shall be supported according to the following plan:

1. The allowance of the Bishops for salary and traveling expenses shall
be estimated by the Committee on Finance of the General Conference and
the sum thus allowed shall be paid out of the General Fund by the Book
Agent.

2. The Book Agent shall pay each Bishop one fourth of the sum allowed
per annum, quarterly, according to the provision in the Financial Plan.

3. The Bishops who shall have been placed on the retired list, shall be
paid the sum of six hundred ($600.00) dollars per annum, to be paid
quarterly as other Bishops.

4. Those Bishops who are unable to do full work shall be paid the same
amount and in the same way as those who are efficient and actively
engaged in the work.

5. In case of the death of a retired Bishop, the remainder of his
allowance for that year shall be paid to his widow.

6. The Book Agent shall pay to the widows of deceased Bishops twenty
($20.00) dollars per month, to be paid quarterly as long as she remains
a widow in good standing in the C. M. E. Church. If she should die
before her children, they shall receive the same allowance until they
become fourteen years of age.


IV. SUPPORT OF THOSE NOT OTHERWISE PROVIDED FOR

All officers appointed by the General Conference, and not otherwise
provided for by law, shall have their salaries fixed by the Joint Board
of Finance of the Conference of which they are members, or within the
bounds of which the work assigned them by the General Conference lies;
and be paid from the proceeds of their office, or by such other means as
the Conference may devise.




 CHAPTER XXXIII.
 CHURCHES AND PARSONAGES


I. CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS

Any church or churches in any Annual Conference of the Colored Methodist
Episcopal Church in America, shall have the right to establish an OLD
FOLKS' Home, ORPHAN ASYLUM, HOSPITAL, or other charitable institutions
in conformity to the laws of the State or Territory in which they are
located. The Trustees of all such institutions shall be members of the
Colored M. E. Church, and shall have authority to found, maintain and
operate such institutions in the name of the C. M. E. Church in America.


II. BUILDING CHURCHES

Ques. Is anything advisable in regard to building churches?

Ans. 1. Let all our churches be plain and decent, and with free seats,
as far as practicable; and they shall in no wise be used for political
purposes or assemblages.

2. In order more effectually to prevent our people from contracting
debts which they are not able to discharge, it shall be the duty of the
Quarterly Conference of every circuit and station where it is
contemplated to build a house of worship to secure the ground or lot on
which such house or houses are to be built, according to our deed of
settlement, which deed must be legally executed; and also said Quarterly
Conference shall appoint a judicious committee of at least three members
of our church, who shall form an estimate of the amount necessary to
build; and three-fourths of the money, according to such estimate, shall
be secured or subscribed before any such building shall be commenced.

3. In all cases where debts for building houses of worship have been or
may be incurred contrary to, or in disregard of, the above recommendation,
our members and friends are requested to discountenance by declining
pecuniary aid to all agents who shall travel abroad beyond their own
circuits or districts for the collection of funds for the discharge of
such debts, except in such peculiar cases as may be approved by an
Annual Conference.

4. In future, we will admit no charter, deed, or conveyance for any
house of worship to be used by us, unless it be provided in such
charter, deed, or conveyance, that the Trustees of said house shall at
all times permit such ministers and preachers, belonging to the Colored
Methodist Episcopal Church in America, as shall from time to time be
duly authorized by the General Conference of our Church, or by the
Annual Conferences, to preach and expound God's holy Word, and to
execute the Discipline of the Church, and to administer the sacraments
therein, according to the true meaning and purport of our deed of
settlement.


III. BUILDING PARSONAGES

Ques. What advice or direction is given concerning the building of
dwelling houses for the use of the married traveling preachers?

Ans. 1. It is recommended to our friends in general, to purchase a lot
of ground in each pastoral charge, and to build a preacher's house
thereon, and to furnish it with at least heavy furniture, and to settle
the same on trustees appointed by the Quarterly Conference, according to
our deed of settlement.

2. It shall be the duty of the Presiding Elders and preachers to use
their influence to carry the above rules respecting building houses, for
the accommodation of preachers and their families, into effect. In order
to do this, each Quarterly Conference shall appoint a committee, (unless
other measures have been adopted), who, with the advice and aid of the
preachers and Presiding Elder, shall devise such means as may seem fit
to raise money for that purpose. And it is recommended to the Annual
Conferences to make a special inquiry of their members respecting this
part of their duty.




 CHAPTER XXXIV.
 SECURING, SELLING, OR TRANSFERRING CHURCH PROPERTY.


1. SECURING CHURCHES AND PARSONAGES

Ques. What shall be done for the security of our preaching houses and
parsonages, and other Church property, and the premises belonging
thereto?

Ans. 1. Each Annual Conference is authorized to make such modification
in the deeds as they may find the different usages and customs of law
require in the different States and Territories, so as to secure the
property firmly by deed, and permanently =in fee simple=, to the Colored
Methodist Episcopal Church in America; but in all conveyances of ground
for the building of houses of worship, or upon which they may have been
already built, let the following clause be inserted at the proper place:
"In trust, that said premises shall be used, kept, maintained, and
disposed of as a place of Divine Worship for the use of the ministry and
membership of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America; subject
to the Discipline, usage, and ministerial appointments of said Church,
as from time to time authorized and declared by the General Conference
of said Church, and the Annual Conference within whose bounds the said
premises are situated."

2. Likewise, in all conveyances of ground for the building of dwelling
houses for the use of the preachers, or upon which they may have been
already built, let the following clause be inserted at the proper place:
"In trust, that said premises shall be held, kept, and maintained and
disposed of as a place of residence for the use and occupancy of the
preachers of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America, who may
from time to time be appointed in said place; subject to the usage and
Discipline of said Church, as from time to time authorized and declared
by the General Conference of said Church, and by the Annual Conference
within whose bounds the said premises are situated."


II. DIVISION, TRANSFER, OR SALE OF CHURCH PROPERTY

1. When any circuit, station, or mission shall be divided into two or
more charges, each separate charge may constitute a new Board or Boards
of Trustees; and the Church property held by the Trustees of the
original charge shall be conveyed to the new Boards thus created, and
the former Board or Boards shall be freed from all pecuniary
liabilities, such being transferred to the new Boards respectively.

2. The Trustees, with the consent of the preacher in charge and the
Quarterly Conference, shall have power to sell any church or parsonage
property, which has gone out of use or should be removed to another
place, the proceeds of which shall be under the direction of the
Quarterly Conference.

3. If the said Trustees, or any of them, or their successors, have
advanced, or shall advance, any sum or sums of money, or shall be
responsible for any sum or sums of money, on account of Church property,
and they, the said Trustees, or their successors, be obliged to pay the
said sum or sums of money, they, or a majority of them, shall be
authorized to raise the said sum or sums of money by a mortgage on the
said property, or by selling the said property, after notice given to
the preacher in charge, or the Presiding Elder of the District, if the
money due be not paid to the said Trustees, or their successors, within
one year after such notice has been given; =provided=, that in no case
shall any such trustees sell or mortgage any Church property unless they
are authorized by the Quarterly Conference, the Presiding Elder being
present in person. Any sale or mortgage made without the authority of
the Quarterly Conference is hereby declared NULL and VOID; and if such
sale takes place, the said Trustees, or their successors, after paying
the debt and other expenses which are due from the money arising from
such sale, shall pay over the remainder of the money produced by the
said sale to the Steward, or Stewards, of the circuit, station, or
mission; which surplus of the produce of said sale shall be forwarded by
the said Steward, or Stewards, to the Quarterly Conference within whose
bounds it is situated, at its next session; which said Quarterly
Conference shall dispose of the said money, by a vote of the majority
for the use of the said circuit, station or mission.




 =PART VIII.=
 BOARDS AND DEPARTMENTS FINANCIAL PLAN





 CHAPTER XXXV.
 FINANCIAL PLAN


Article I. (1) The General Funds of the Colored M. E. Church in America
shall be one hundred thousand ($100,000) dollars per annum; =provided=,
the assessment in any Conference or charge shall not exceed 50c per
capita.

2. Said amount shall be divided as follows:

 (a) Bishops' salary                                         25 per cent
 (b) Education                                               22 per cent
 (c) General Missions                                        22 per cent
 (d) Publishing Int.                                         10 per cent
 (e) Building Fund                                            5 per cent
 (f) Conf. Claimants                                         10 per cent
 (g) Contingent Fund                                          6 per cent

Article II. (1) There shall be a Board of Equalization consisting of one
Bishop, the Book Agent, and the Auditing Committee.

2. The Board of Equalization shall apportion to each Annual Conference
according to its numerical strength, its pro rata of the General
Assessment.

3. The Joint Board of Finance of each Annual Conference shall apportion,
and adjust the same in and to all the charges according to the number of
ministers and members reported in the first Annual Conference after the
General Conference. Such assessment must stand unchanged for four years.

Art. III. (1) The General Funds shall be collected quarterly by the
pastor in charge, and paid to the Presiding Elder each quarterly visit.

2. The Presiding Elder shall forward the amount collected from the
several charges in his district quarterly to the Agent, and take his
receipt for the same. The receipt for each quarterly remittance shall be
kept by the Presiding Elder and turned over to the Joint Board of
Finance at the Annual Conference.

3. The Joint Board of Finance shall forward the receipts with the
balance of the money, that may be reported in the Annual Conference to
the Book Agent and take his receipt for the whole amount of General
Funds paid by said Conference during the year.

Art. IV. (1) The salary and traveling expenses of the Bishops shall be
two thousand two hundred and fifty ($2250.00) dollars each per annum,
one fourth of which shall be paid quarterly.

2. The salary of retired Bishops shall be six hundred ($600) dollars
each per annum, one fourth of which shall be paid quarterly.

3. The allowance to widows of deceased Bishops shall be two hundred and
forty ($240.00) dollars each per annum.

Art. V. The Book Agent shall receive all the General Funds, and shall
keep an itemized account of the same. He shall report to the Publishing
Board annually, the amount received from each Annual Conference in the
connection; and to the General Conference, the whole amount received
during the quadrennium.

Art. VI. The eight-four (84) per cent. of the General Funds handled by
the Book Agent shall be apportioned by him according to the following
plan.

 (a) The Bishops shall be paid quarterly, each                   $562.50
 (b) The retired Bishops shall be paid quarterly, each            150.00

2. Should a sufficient amount not be realized from the 25 per cent.
collected quarterly to enable the active Bishops to travel through their
Episcopal Fields, the Agent shall draw on the whole amount of General
Funds, to make up the deficiency.

3. The twenty-two per cent. collected under the provision of Article I
for Missions shall be paid to the Book Agent who shall turn over 50 per
cent of the above amount to the Secretary of Missions to be used for
Missions and missionaries on the fields.

Art. VII. (1) All money raised for Education under the provision of
Article I shall be apportioned to the Institutions of learning,
recognized by the General Conference and Board of Education.

2. The Annual Conference, within whose bounds said money is raised,
shall have the right to designate the school to which its money shall be
paid.

3. Every Annual Conference shall have the right to direct that one half
of its money be held by the Secretary for Education of a minister, or
ministers on trial, and to designate the school to be attended by said
minister, or ministers; provided, however that the student be required
to return three-fourths at least of said money used for his expenses to
the school—one fourth each year until the full amount shall have been
paid.

4. No one shall be recommended to our schools to be supported by the
conference unless it be proven that he is unable to pay his own
expenses.

5. A student recommended for support to secure an education, shall give
his personal note to the conference covering the amount to be received
by him before he enters school.

6. The Joint Board of Finance shall send a statement to the Agent,
naming the school to which its money shall be paid.

7. Money for Education from the General Funds shall go to the Secretary
of Education. The Book Agent shall send 50 per cent. of this amount in
quarterly installments, and the remainder shall be turned over after the
annual meeting of the Publishing Board.

Art. VIII. (1) The ten per cent. collected under provision of Article II
for Publishing Fund shall be retained by the Agent, subject to the order
of the Publishing Board.

2. The Publishing Board, after paying the salaries of the Book Agent,
Editor of the Christian Index, Editor of the Eastern and Western Index,
shall use the balance of the money in purchasing ground, erecting
buildings, and, in any other way necessary for the advancement of
Publishing Interests.

3. The five per cent. raised for building fund shall be retained by the
Agent for said purposes.

Art. IX. Should there be a surplus accruing from the twenty-five per
cent., for Bishops' salary, it shall be kept as a contingent fund on
Bishops' salary.

Art. X. (1) The ten per cent. collected under Article I for Conference
Claimants shall be forwarded by the Joint Board of Finance to the
Secretary of the Department for Superannuated Preachers, widows and
orphans of preachers, to be applied according to the constitution of
said department.

2. The six per cent. for Annual Conference Contingent Fund shall be
retained by the Joint Board of Finance to be used as the Conference may
direct.

Art. XI. It is the duty of every pastor to raise the full assessment,
laid against his charge by the Joint Board of Finance. The Presiding
Elder shall use his influence to help raise the same.

Art. XII. All laws in conflict with the above plan are hereby repealed.




 CHAPTER XXXVI.
 THE JOINT BOARD OF FINANCE


1. Each Annual Conference shall have a Joint Board of Finance, appointed
by the President of the Conference, (unless otherwise ordered,) at the
close of its annual session, to hold their office until the close of the
next ensuing Annual Conference session.

2. Said Board shall consist of one clerical member of the Conference and
one layman for each Presiding Elder's District. They shall elect their
own Chairman and Secretary, and the Board shall fill all vacancies that
may occur in the body; =provided=, they do so by keeping up an equal
number of clerical and lay members.

3. It shall be the duty of the Joint Board of Finance—

 (a) To receive all moneys collected as Annual Conference collections or
 otherwise, and to forward the amount collected for superannuated
 preachers, widows, and orphans to the Secretary of that fund.

 (b) To estimate the amount necessary to meet the claims of the
 superannuated preachers, widows, and orphans of preachers, and send a
 list of these claimants to the Secretary of that department, together
 with the number of years each superannuate has served in the active
 itinerant ministry and the age of each child.

 (c) To adjust and apportion the General and Contingent Funds in and to
 all the charges of the Annual Conference, according to the number of
 ministers and members reported at each session of the Conference.

 (d) To fix the salary and traveling expenses of Presiding Elders and
 apportion the same in and to the several charges within the District.

 (e) To decide all issues that may arise between stewards and Presiding
 Elders, or between stewards and preachers in charge, with regard to
 salary. The decision of the Joint Board shall be final, but in no case,
 shall any preacher hold a claim against any charge after his removal.

 (f) To carefully consider and report to the conference upon all
 financial interests referred to it. All financial matters of the
 conference shall be referred to this Board.

 (g) To make a full report of all its proceedings to the conference,
 which shall have power to amend, approve, or re-commit.

4. The Recording Steward of each circuit or station shall report to the
Joint Board of Finance a full account of the transactions of the Board
of Stewards of the preceding year.

5. Each Annual Conference shall adopt its own method of raising money
for its legal claimants and its own expenses, provided such methods are
in harmony with the General laws and do not interfere with the rights of
the church conference to adopt its own method of raising money to meet
its expenses.




 CHAPTER XXXVII.
 THE PUBLISHING DEPARTMENT



Art. 1. (1) There shall be and is a Publishing Department of the C. M.
E. Church in America.

2. The Publishing House shall be located in Nashville, Tenn.

3. The Publishing Department was established for the object and purpose
of spreading the Christian religion by the publication, sale and
dissemination of moral and religious literature, the promotion of
Christian education, and for publishing books, book-making, book selling
and for the transaction of such other business as is legitimately
connected with a Publishing Department.

4. This department shall publish weekly the Christian Index, as the
Official Organ of the church, and shall supervise the publication of the
Eastern Index and the Western Index, which shall also be published
weekly. Subscription to the Christian Index shall be $1.50 per year; of
the Eastern Index and the Western Index, $1.00 each, per year.

5. The interests of the Publishing Department and the publication of the
Christian Index shall be under the management of the Book Agent, who,
with the Editor, shall be elected by the General Conference.

6. The editors of the Eastern Index and Western Index shall be elected
by the General Conference and shall co-operate with the Agent in
furthering the interests of the Publishing House.

Article II. (1) The Publishing Board shall have general supervision and
direction of all the publishing interests of the church.

2. The officers of the Board shall be a chairman, who shall be one of
the Bishops of the Church, a secretary and such other officers as may be
necessary.

3. The annual meeting of the Publishing Board shall be held on the first
Wednesday in May of each year, or at such other times and places as the
Board may appoint or as the chairman may direct. At all meetings of the
Board, a majority shall, constitute a quorum.

4. The Publishing Board shall keep a correct record of all its
proceedings and shall examine carefully into the affairs of the
Publishing Department.

Article III. (1) There shall be an Auditing Committee elected by the
General Conference consisting of three members, one of whom shall be a
layman, and two clerical (members), who shall live in proximity to the
Publishing Department. The auditors shall meet annually, at least a week
before the regular meeting of the Board, to audit the accounts of the
Agent, inspect the entire business of the Publishing Department, and to
see that all complaints about the management of the Book House in
neglecting to fill orders for publications, including the Index are
properly adjusted. The expenses of said committee shall be borne by the
Publishing Department.

2. The General Conference shall elect quadrennially a Book Agent who
under the direction of the Publishing Board, shall have authority to
regulate the production and distribution of our publications and to
conduct the affairs of the Publishing Department.

3. It shall be the duty of the Book Agent to publish, purchase, sell and
distribute such books, periodicals and publications as are authorized by
the General Conference or the Publishing Board.

4. The Book Agent shall keep the account of the Publishing Department by
such uniform system as he may think best or as directed by the Auditing
Committee.

5. The Book Agent shall receive all General Funds, keep an itemized
account of the same, and report to the Publishing Board the whole amount
of General Funds received from each Annual Conference, and finally at
the General Conference report all moneys received during the
quadrennium.

6. He shall pay the Bishops their salaries and traveling expenses
quarterly, and shall give his entire time to promote the success of the
Publishing Department and faithfully perform all duties which properly
belong to his office.

Article V. (1) The editor of the Christian Index shall faithfully
perform all duties which properly belong to the editorial office and
co-operate with the Agent in doing whatever he can to build up the
interests of the Publishing Department.

2. The salary of the Book Agent shall be fifteen hundred ($1500.00)
dollars per annum and the salary of the editor of the Christian Index
shall be fifteen hundred ($1500.00) dollars per annum.

3. The editors of the Eastern and Western Index shall receive $600 per
annum each to be applied to publication of the respective papers and in
part payment on salary. They shall serve a charge for balance of
support.

3. The Publishing Board by a two-third vote shall have power to suspend
the Agent or Editor for immoral conduct or inefficiency in office during
the interval of the General Conference. In such cases, if an
investigation is found necessary, the accused shall be given due notice,
and one of the Bishops shall be appointed to preside at the
investigation. If the accused shall be judged guilty, he shall be
suspended from office, and the Annual Conference to which he belongs
shall proceed to try him as provided by the book of Discipline.

Article VI. (1) The proceeds of the Publishing House after a sufficient
amount with which to carry on its affairs has been retained, shall be
regularly applied to the benefit of the traveling, supernumerary and
retired preachers, their widows and children.

2. All laws in conflict with this constitution are hereby repealed.




 CHAPTER XXXVIII.
 THE GENERAL MISSIONARY DEPARTMENT.


Art. 1. There shall be a Mission Board of the Colored Methodist
Episcopal Church, chartered according to the laws of the State of
Tennessee. The Mission Board shall have general supervision of all
Missionary operations of the church.

Art. 2. The members of this Board shall be a Bishop, who shall be
President, the Secretary of Missions, and one representative from each
Episcopal District. The Secretary of Missions and the members from
Episcopal Districts, shall be elected by the =General Conference=.

Art. 3. The Mission Board shall regulate its own operations, appropriate
money for its expenses, provide for Missions not provided for by Annual
Conferences, and contribute to the support of preachers in Mission
Fields. It shall assist in building houses of worship, provide such
literature as may be necessary for the advancement of the work and
co-operate with other Methodist Bodies in similar work, whenever it may
be necessary and mutually agreeable.

Art. 4. (1) The revenue of the Mission Board shall be derived from
collections on General Missionary Day, Sunday Schools, Epworth Leagues,
Sunday School Conventions, District and Annual Conferences, collections
taken by the Secretary and the Bishops, 50 per cent. of the Mission
money accruing from the General Funds, and 20 per cent. of all money
raised by the Missionary Societies of Annual Conferences.

2. Twenty per cent. of all money raised by the Annual Conference Board
of Missions, shall be directed to the Secretary of Missions and his
receipt taken for same. The Bishops shall present the receipt of the
Secretary with their reports, to the Mission Board.

Art. 5. (1) The Second Sunday in August of each year shall be General
Missionary Day. This day shall be strictly observed by all Presiding
Elders, pastors and congregations throughout the connection. Presiding
Elders and pastors will preach at one service, on the subject of
Missions, and may provide a program bearing on the same subject for
another service. Care and study shall be given to teach the people the
place and importance of Missionary work in the church.

2. Each member of the church is requested to pay five cents for Missions
on General Missionary Day, and each congregation will be expected to
report a sum equal to five cents per capita at the Annual Conference.

3. Each pastor will forward the amount raised on General Missionary Day
at once to his Presiding Elder, and the Presiding Elder will remit the
same at once to the Secretary of Missions and take his receipt, which
receipt will be counted in the settlement of the District at the Annual
Conference.

Art. VI. (1) The Secretary shall be a minister of the Gospel, but may be
a member of any Annual Conference. He shall keep a permanent record of
the operations of the Department, publish a synopsis of his work
quarterly in one of the papers of the church, attend to all legal
business relating to the work, travel throughout the church in interest
of the work, and report annually, to the Board, or as often as they deem
it necessary.

2. The Secretary of Missions shall devise plans and co-operate with all
Annual Conference Missionaries in holding such institutes, conventions,
and Missionary Meetings, as will advance the interest of the church. In
all cases, the Missionary Department shall share in the money raised by
such devices and meetings.

3. The Secretary shall distribute literature for all Missionaries
throughout the Church, which literature, shall be uniform.

4. The Secretary of Missions is authorized to organize Missionary
Societies wherever he finds it necessary, and to publish a Missionary
paper, monthly, provided, it shall not cost the church more than $200
per annum.

5. The salary and traveling expenses of the Secretary shall be $1500 per
annum, to be paid quarterly by the Book Agent from the Mission fund.

Art. 7. The Bishops shall report annually to the Mission Board, the
number of Missionaries employed, the amount of support allowed each, the
number of Missions established, the number of members, and the cost of
maintaining each point. Their reports shall be written and shall embrace
a statement of the condition and prospect of each Mission.

Art. 8. The funds of the Mission Board shall be deposited in bank in the
name of the Board of Missions of the C. M. E. Church, subject to checks
drawn by the Secretary and signed by the President.

Art. 9. Any Annual or District Conference, church, Sunday School,
Epworth League Chapter, or individual, may assume in part or in whole,
the support of a Missionary, Mission, or Mission School, which may be
established or approved by the Mission Board, provided, that in all
cases, the money be sent to the Mission Board For application.

Art. 10. Presiding Elders shall see that each pastor organize a
Missionary Society or Societies, in his charge encourage the idea and
spirit of Missions among the people, see that each society is supplied
with literature, and preach a sermon on Missions in every charge in his
District at least once a year.

Art. 11. The Mission Board shall form an auditing committee from its own
membership, which committee shall audit the books of the Secretary and
see that they are properly kept.

Art. 12. All laws in conflict herewith, are repealed.




 CHAPTER XXXIX.
 WOMAN'S MISSIONARY BOARD


Art. 1. This Society shall be known as the Woman's Home Missionary
Society of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America.

Art. II. The object of this Society shall be to enlist the members of
our Church in the work of giving aid to mission points and mission
preachers in all our conferences; to help to build parsonages and
suitable houses of worship; to foster the cause of religious instruction
among the neglected poor, and to otherwise aid the cause of the blessed
Master.

Art. III. This Society shall be controlled by the Annual Conference in
whose bounds it may operate, which shall elect its own officers and
regulate its own affairs, provided it does not interfere with any of the
work that may be planned by the Mission Board.

Art. IV. The officers of the Woman's Home Missionary Society shall be
elected annually, and shall consist of a President, Vice-President,
Secretary-Treasurer, and five managers, who shall be an Executive Board
for the Annual Conference, controlling all the missions that may be
under the supervision of the Annual Conference.

Art. V. The funds of the Society shall be derived from membership fees,
mite boxes, contributions, card devices, donations, and such other means
as may be adopted by the Annual Conference.

Art. VI. Each Annual Conference shall have full control of all money
that may be raised by the Woman's Home Missionary Society, and shall
retain the same to be used as the Conference may see fit.

Art. VII. The Annual Conference Boards shall arrange constitutions and
by-laws governing the Woman's Home Missionary Society within their
bounds, and shall also arrange for Juvenile Societies to be formed among
the children, and they shall send a report of their work each year to
the Secretary of Missions for publication.

Art. VIII. There shall be held in each District a Missionary Convention
of the Woman's Home Missionary Society, which shall be under the
supervision of the Presiding Elder, and composed of the preachers in
charge of circuits, stations and missions, and one representative from
each society formed in the District. The time for holding this
Convention shall be fixed by the Presiding Elder, and the place by the
Convention.




 CHAPTER XL.
 THE CHURCH EXTENSION DEPARTMENT


Art. I. There shall be a Board of Church Extension of the Colored
Methodist Episcopal Church in America, which shall be conducted as a
body corporate under such laws and regulations as the General Conference
may, from time to time, adopt.

Art. II (1) The Board shall consist of a Bishop, who shall be President,
a Vice-President, the General Secretary, a Treasurer, and nine managers,
who shall be elected by the General Conference. All Bishops, except the
President, shall be ex-officio members of the Board.

2. The Board shall meet annually. Seven members shall constitute a
quorum.

3. The location or headquarters of the Board shall be fixed by the
General Conference at Louisville, Ky.

4. The Board shall have authority to fill all vacancies which may occur
in the interval of the General Conference, regulate its own proceedings,
appropriate money to meet its own expenses, determine what amount may be
donated or loaned to each applicant, and do such other business as may
be regular and legitimate, provided however, that no money shall be
appropriated in the general work for other purposes than purchasing and
securing church lots and securing or erecting church buildings, paying
the General Secretary, and meeting such other expenses as are necessary
to carry on the work of the Board.

Art. III. (1) There shall be an Executive Committee to consist of five
members. The members of this committee shall be appointed by the Board
of Church Extension.

2. The Executive Committee shall meet quarterly, unless otherwise
ordered by the Board. Three members shall constitute a quorum.

3. It shall be the duty of the Executive Committee to carry out the
instructions of the Board given them from time to time.

Art. IV. (1) The General Secretary shall be a minister of the Gospel,
but may be a member of any Annual Conference.

2. He shall be subject to the authority and control of the Board and
shall conduct the correspondence under its direction.

3. He shall have access to all conferences and congregations of the
connection, and be permitted to take collections in any and all of them
for the Department.

4. He shall make a quarterly report to the Executive Committee of all
moneys received and paid out, and to whom; this report to be signed by
the President and Treasurer of the Board.

5. He shall, when called upon, go to any part of the church, in order to
help Presiding Elders and pastors buy lands and build suitable churches
and parsonages thereon.

6. In every case where the General Secretary helps a mission, circuit,
or station, in raising money, one half of the money raised must be given
to the mission, circuit, or station, and the other half must go to the
Department, but, where a mission has no lot, upon which to build, it
shall retain and use all money raised, but shall give a note for one
half of this amount to the General Secretary, said note to be paid in
one to seven years.

7. The General Secretary shall receive for salary $1500 per annum and
whatever the Board of Church Extension may allow for traveling expenses.

Art. V. (1) The revenue of the Board shall be derived from an assessment
of 5c per capita on the membership of the Church, special collections by
the Secretary and Bishops, devices of the Secretary, and gifts and
bequests.

2. In all cases, the moneys raised by the General Secretary shall be
sent to the Treasurer of the Board, who shall in turn, pay out money on
the order of the President and Secretary of the Board, provided the
order shall be in accord with the action of the Board.

3. The General Secretary shall not charge more than 6 per cent. interest
on money loaned any church; he may, wherever conditions require, and
ability permits, charge less.

4. All orders for money on the Treasurer of the Board shall be signed by
the President and Secretary of said Board, and, in the absence of the
President, by the Vice-President.

Art. VI. (1) The Church Extension Board shall have authority to
negotiate loans, furnish security for the payment of same, and to
foreclose any mortgage and secure the property in =fee simple= to this
Department, provided, that in no case, shall any fore-closure dispossess
a congregation of the rightful use of the property. In case the
membership should abandon the use of any property by moving away or
joining other churches, both the title and possession of such property
shall revert to the Board.

2. In no case, shall any loan be made on church property unless it is
secured by a first mortgage.

Art. VII. All applications for aid shall set forth:

 1. A description of the building for which aid is asked.

 2. An estimate on probable cost to complete building.

 3. Amount of cash and reliable subscription on hand.

 4. The nature of the title, its validity, and whether held in trust for
 the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America.

 5. The name of the Board of Trustees.

 6. Number of church members, number of Sunday School scholars, and
 population of the town or city.

 7. The leading industry of the town or city.

 8. Any additional information that may be deemed necessary or useful to
 the Board.

Art. VIII. (1) Each Annual Conference shall organize a conference Board
of Church Extension, which shall be auxiliary to the parent board. It
shall have charge of all the interests and work of Church Extension
within its conference. The Secretary and Treasurer of each Annual
Conference Board shall make a report to the parent board at such times,
and subject to such rules and regulations as may be provided by the
parent board; shall forward all moneys raised by said board to the
General Secretary without delay, but may retain 25 per cent. to be used
within the bounds of said Annual Conference.

2. No one shall be authorized to organize any local auxiliary at any
time.

Art. IX. (1) Presiding Elders shall call for a report of Church
Extension from each charge in the District Conference, which report
shall be recorded as a part of the business of the District Conference.

2. They shall bring the interests of Church Extension prominently before
their Quarterly Conferences, and collect at least one fourth of the 5c
per capita assessment from each charge and forward same quarterly to the
General Secretary.

Art. X. The books of the Church Extension Department shall be kept open
for inspection by any member of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church.

Art. XI. These laws may be amended at any session of the General
Conference.




 CHAPTER XLI.
 THE EPWORTH LEAGUE SOCIETY


Art. I. There shall be and is an Epworth League Society of the Colored
Methodist Episcopal Church.

Art. II. The object of the Epworth League Society shall be to promote
piety and loyalty in the young people and friends of the church; to
bring into deeper sympathy, closer union, and mutual co-operation, the
three stages of life, youth, middle, and old age; to stimulate the study
of the Holy Scriptures; to deepen and intensify the desire for purity of
heart, consecration of life, and growth in grace, and to train its
members for true service to Christ and the Church.

Art. III. (1) The Epworth League Society shall consist of four general
departments; The General Conference Chapter, the Annual Conference
Chapter, the District Conference Chapter, and the Local Chapter.

2. Each Chapter shall have seven departmental sections or committees as
follows: (1) Devotional or Spiritual; (2) Literary and Social; (3) Mercy
and Help; (4) Correspondence; (5) Missions and Care for the Aged; (6)
Finance; and, (7) Music.

Art. IV. (1) The General Conference Chapter shall have a Board composed
of one Bishop, who shall be President, a General Secretary, who shall be
fourth vice-president, and six other members, all elected by the General
Conference.

2. The Epworth League Board shall hold its meetings annually at such
time and place as the President may determine. It shall hear, audit, and
pass on the report of the Secretary, select proper literature for use in
all the Leagues, supervise and direct the work of the Secretary, and see
that the Department meets the object of its organization, as set forth
in Article II.

Art. V. (1) Each Annual and District Conference and Local Chapter shall
have its president and a vice-president for each department. All
officers shall be elected annually.

2. Each vice-president of Annual and District Conferences and Local
Chapters, shall choose three (3) persons, who, with the vice-president,
shall constitute an Executive Committee of his Department.

3. Officers of the Local Chapters shall be nominated by the League, and
confirmed by the Quarterly Conference.

4. Annual Conference Chapters shall meet annually, separate and apart
from the Annual Conference at such time as may be appointed by the
Conference President, and at such place as the League may choose. The
President shall notify the General Secretary of the time and place of
such meeting.

5. District Chapters shall meet once a year, at such time and place as
the Presiding Elder may select. The District Conference Chapter shall be
composed of representatives of each Local League in the District.

6. Local Chapters should meet weekly, or as often as circumstances will
permit, and shall be under the supervision of the pastor, who shall
organize a chapter or chapters in his charge, and see that they are
conducted in accordance with the "Guide."

7. A City League Chapter may be organized in any town or city where two
or more local leagues exist. This League shall meet quarterly. The
President of the League of the first church shall conduct these meetings
in the same manner as meetings of Local Leagues.

Art. VI. (1) The Secretary, who may be a preacher or a layman, shall be
elected by ballot by the General Conference for a term of four years.

2. He shall have supervision of the Annual and District Conference, and
Local Chapters, shall conduct the correspondence of the Department, and
travel throughout the Church in interest of the League. He shall keep a
record of the Annual and District Conference and Local Chapters, with
the number of members and work accomplished by each.

3. He shall report annually, to the Board the general state and
condition of the League, the number of members and the amount of money
received from each Annual Conference, and by special efforts, and
quadrennially, to the General Conference.

4. The salary and traveling expenses of the General Secretary shall be
$1500 annually, to be paid out of the revenue of the Department.

Art VII. (1) The revenue of the Department shall be derived from one
half of the money raised by conference leagues, $1.00 from each pastoral
charge or League Chapter to be paid by pastor at the Annual Conference,
and from the activities of the Secretary on the field.

2. Each member of the Annual Conference League shall pay 25c at its
Annual meeting, the same to be applied to the revenue of the General
Department.

Art. VIII. All Presiding Elders, pastors, local preachers, and officers
of Local Chapters shall be members of the Annual Conference League.

Art. IX. The business of the League shall be conducted in accordance
with the Epworth League "Guide."




 CHAPTER XLII.
 THE BOARD OF EDUCATION


Art. 1. The educational operations of the Colored Methodist Episcopal
Church shall be conducted under the following provisions and
regulations.

Art. 2. There shall be a Board of Education of the Colored Methodist
Episcopal Church to be known as the "General Conference Board of
Education," to consist of nine members including a Bishop and the
Secretary of Education, one from each Episcopal District, the Bishop and
the Secretary being at large.

Art. 3. (1) This Board shall have an advisory relation to the schools of
the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church, shall devise ways and means to
aid our institutions, shall receive and disburse such funds as shall be
committed to it from time to time. It shall serve as a Board of
Reference or Arbitration, and when necessary may take measures to
protect the property interests of our Educational Institutions. It shall
seek to promote general, industrial, theological and Bible training, and
it shall seek to promote the cause of Education throughout the church by
collecting and publishing statistics by giving counsel with regard to
the location and organization of our educational institutions. It shall
also serve as a general agency for communications between teachers
desiring employment and institutions needing their service.

2. The further objects of this Board shall be (1) to recommend
institutions for connectional relations; (2) to classify the Educational
Institutions of the Church; (3) to decide upon uniform entrance
requirements for College and Normal courses in our Institutions; (4) to
decide upon a uniform course of study for our College work as to credits
required for meritorious degrees; (5) to assist in raising endowment
funds and holding Educational rallies and mass meetings in large
centers; (6) to prorate equitably money coming to the Board; (7) to work
in every way practical to advance the cause of Education for our Church;
(8) to promote Correspondence courses and Ministerial Preparation.

Art. 4. (1) The General Conference Board of Education shall meet
annually at such time and place as it may appoint, and in special
session when called by the President upon request of the Secretary of
Education or when requested in writing by five members. Five members
shall constitute a quorum for a regular and four members for a call
meeting.

2. The members of the Board shall be elected by the General Conference
upon nomination by the Committee on Education. The term of office shall
be four years, but they "hold over" until their successors are duly
elected. Vacancies occurring in the Board in the interval of the General
Conference shall be filled by the Board and such member or members shall
serve until the General Conference shall fill the place.

Art. 5. The work of the Board of Education shall be conducted under such
rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the General Conference
from time to time. The operations of the Board shall be conducted under
charter secured by the Board according to the laws of the State of ———.
The Board shall have authority to receive and apply donations, devices,
bequests, to own, buy and sell real estate, to do all other things
provided for in said charter, or subject to and under the provisions of
the charter under which said Board shall operate.

2. The Board shall have authority to regulate its own proceedings, to
provide quarters for the work of the Secretary of Education and such
necessary aid as the Board shall deem advisable. The Board shall further
have the authority to fix and pay the salary of a Director of a
Correspondence School whenever Funds may be given to the Board to do
such work; to determine annually what schools and educational
enterprises shall receive aid; to appropriate money for necessary
expense of maintaining the office; provided, however, that no
appropriation shall be made for building except from funds contributed
for that purpose, to secure and distribute aid to students preparing for
the mission field or for providing aid to needy students especially the
children of our itinerant preachers.

Art. 6. The Board shall have authority to raise an Endowment and Loan
Fund. These shall be separate funds raised for general distribution. The
Board shall have the authority to receive and hold in trust for the C.
M. E. Church any real or personal property and to sell and convey same
for uses and objects herein declared. Only the interest on this fund
(except when the donor directs otherwise) shall be used, the principal
remaining as a permanent fund.

Art. 7. The Board shall gather statistics and other educational and
religious information and shall prepare, publish and distribute
pamphlets and leaflets suitable to advance the cause of Christian
education in our homes and schools among our people.

Art. 8. The Secretary of Education who shall be elected by the General
Conference at the time of electing the other general officers for a term
of four years, shall be the executive officer of the Board of Education.
He shall, as corresponding secretary of the Board, receive all moneys
and turn same over to the treasurer of the Board. The salary of the
Secretary of Education shall be fixed by the General Conference at
fifteen hundred dollars, which shall be paid out of the General
Education money monthly.

All moneys of public and special collections by the Secretary shall be
placed in the treasury and his traveling expenses shall be paid on his
order to the treasurer.

Art. 9. The revenue of the Board of Education shall be from the
education money out of the General Fund, 80 per cent. of which shall be
forwarded by the Book Agent to the Secretary of Education as collected
quarterly; from special collections by the Secretary of Education, the
Bishops and others; and from gifts, devices, bequests and appropriations
from other Boards. The Secretary of Education shall be bonded in the sum
of $3,000.

Art. 10. It shall be the duty of each Annual Conference to organize
within its bounds an Annual Conference Board of Education which shall
have charge of all educational work within its bounds, literary and
religious. The Annual Conference Board shall be auxiliary to the General
Conference Board of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church; they shall
conduct their work in harmony with the educational policy of the church
as set forth in this constitution and other acts of the General
Conference; they shall co-operate with the Board of Education in
promoting both general and local educational work. The Annual Conference
Board of Education shall provide for an Educational Anniversary during
the Annual Conference session and shall co-operate with the Secretary of
Education in providing a suitable program for such meetings. This Annual
Conference Board shall hold at least one meeting annually for the
consideration and promotion within the bounds of the Annual Conference
of the general and local interests of literary and religious education.

Art. 11. The Board may establish a teachers' Bureau for the purpose of
bringing graduates of our Church institutions and other competent
persons desiring to teach into communication with institutions seeking
teachers.

Art. 12. There shall be a Commission on Educational standards, of six
practical educators appointed with the Secretary of Education to arrange
and protect the standards of our Church institutions. They shall
prescribe the minimum requirements to be demanded in the several courses
given in our schools. The Commission shall carefully work out a plan for
the classification of our schools and shall report within one year to
the Board of Education, its work. It shall then be the duty of the
General Conference Board of Education through its Secretary to inspect
the financial condition and equipment, the amount and quality of work
done in all educational institutions, of the church, to classify them as
Grammar School, High School, Academy, Junior College, College,
Theological Seminary according to the relation of its equipment and the
work done by it to the standards established by the commission on
education. The Commission on Educational Standards shall be elected by
the General Conference on nomination by the Bishops and Secretary of
Education.

Art. 13. The Board shall meet immediately after its election upon call
of the Corresponding Secretary of Education and elect a President,
Vice-President, Recording Secretary and Treasurer.

Art. 14. All laws and parts of laws in our Discipline in conflict with
this enactment are hereby repealed.




 CHAPTER XLIII.
 THE SUNDAY SCHOOL DEPARTMENT


In order to perfect Bible knowledge for the moral and religious training
of the children of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America;
the General Conference of the C. M. E. Church directs that there shall
be a Sunday School Department which shall be under the general
supervision of a General Sunday School Board, to be authorized by the
General Conference, whose chief officer shall be that of Editor, and
said department shall be located in the Publishing House, wherever
settled, etc.

1. The Sunday School Department shall include all of the Sunday-schools
in the C. M. E. Church, and shall be subject to such rules and
regulations as The General Sunday School Board and the General
Conference may from time to time direct.

2. The purpose of said Department shall be to educate our young people
in all of the phases of Sunday School training and service, to give
course and impetus to a systematic study of the Holy Bible, and to
supply the Sunday Schools with the proper literature including
Catechisms and tracts, and to assist needy Sunday Schools whenever
practical.

3. The General Conference shall elect an Editor for the Sunday School
Department, whose term of office shall be four years, and until his
successor is elected. The Editor shall be the executive officer of the
Sunday School Department, and shall edit all Sunday School literature
comprising Lessons, Leaves, Books, Tracts, Magazines, Lithographs and
etc. It shall be the duty of the Editor to approve or disapprove of
whatever Sunday School helps that may be suggested by the General Sunday
School Board for use in our Sunday Schools.

4. His salary shall be fixed by the General Sunday School Board per
annum plus his necessary traveling expenses. The General Sunday School
Board shall fix a salary or wage for a stenographer, or other necessary
help of the Department.

5. The Editor shall render an annual report to the General Sunday School
Board, and an annual report to each Annual Conference in the connection
as to the amount of literature used, and number of Sunday Schools using
the Sunday School supplies of our own Church, within its bounds, and a
quadrennial report to the General Conference.

6. The Editor of the Sunday School Department shall be amenable for his
official conduct to the General Sunday School Board and to the General
Conference who shall have right and power for cause sufficient to them
to remove him from office; the General Board having the right to suspend
and to fill the vacancy until the ensuing General Conference.

7. All of the Sunday Schools of the C. M. E. Church shall be under the
management of the Sunday School Department, the regulations of which
shall be as follows: There shall be a Sunday School Board in every
Annual Conference and District Conference, and District Sunday School
Convention, and Quarterly Conference. It shall be the duty of the Annual
Conference Sunday School Board to inquire into the reports read by the
pastors, as to the kind and amount of literature each Sunday School
uses, and to make full reports to the Annual Conference in session on
our Sunday School work, with the recommendations. This report must be
printed annually in the Minutes.

As in the order above, the District Conference and District Sunday
School Convention shall confine their reports and recommendations to the
Sunday School work of the District. The Quarterly Conference Sunday
School Board shall be composed of the pastor and superintendents,
officers and teachers of a station, circuit or mission; whose duty shall
be to extend the circulation and influence of our Sunday School
literature into every possible local precinct, and to make report with
recommendation of the progress of Sunday School work, to the quarterly
conference and church conference and to the district conference and
Sunday School Convention. A Sunday School Board, like a committee, may
consist of from three to forty-nine.

8. An Annual Conference Sunday School Board shall be appointed by the
Presiding Bishop and shall continue their work for four years. All of
the district and quarterly conference Boards shall be affected and
reorganized by the appointments of a Presiding Elder and pastor.

9. It shall also be the duty of the Sunday School Editor to assist the
Book Agent by supplying our Sunday Schools (including needy schools)
with our own literature. Suggested order of business for a local Sunday
School Board.

 (a) Devotion.

 (b) Reading Minutes of previous meeting.

 (c) Unfinished business.

 (d) Report and recommendation of Superintendent.

 (e) Treasurer's report.

 (f) Librarian's report.

 (g) New business.




 CHAPTER XLIV.
 SUPERANNUATED PREACHERS,' WIDOWS,' AND ORPHANS' FUND.


Art. I. (1) There shall be and is a department known as the
Superannuated Preachers,' Widows,' and Orphans' Fund of the Colored M.
E. Church.

2. The object of this department is to provide a fund for Superannuated
Preachers, Widows and Orphans of deceased preachers.

3. This department shall be under the management of a Board of Directors
consisting of a Bishop, the Secretary-treasurer and five ministers
elected by the General Conference.

4. The Board of Directors shall meet annually at such time and place as
the President of the Board shall determine.

5. The Board of Directors shall supervise the work of the department,
hear and audit the report of the Secretary-Treasurer, and co-operate
with him in every possible way to build up the department.

Art. II. (1) The Secretary-Treasurer shall receive all moneys of this
department and give his receipt for the same. He shall keep an accurate
account of all moneys received and paid out to claimants by Annual
Conferences. He shall report annually to the Board of Directors and
quadrennially to the General Conference.

2. He shall keep a record of the Superannuated preachers, widows and
orphans in each Annual Conference, showing the time each superannuate
has served in the active ministry, the number and age of the orphans of
each minister's family, and the time served in active work by every
minister, whose widow is a claimant on this fund.

3. He shall pay claims only on the recommendation of the Annual
Conference, endorsed by the Presiding Bishop and the President of the
Joint Board of Finance.

4. He shall make settlement with all claimants on or about January 1st
of each year in order to get reports from all conferences.

5. The Secretary-Treasurer is authorized to devise plans to raise money
to meet payments when it becomes necessary.

6. The Secretary-Treasurer shall furnish such bond as the Board of
Directors may deem necessary for protection of the funds of the
department. He shall receive for salary $1200 per annum.

7. The books of the department shall be open for inspection at any time
on request of the Board.

Art. III. (1) The funds of this department shall accrue from the 10 per
cent. of the General Funds for Superannuated preachers, widows and
orphans, from a per capita of one dollar on all active preachers and
laymen of every Annual Conference and from plans and devices of the
Secretary-Treasurer.

2. Should there be an insufficient amount in the treasury to pay the
minimum pension, the Secretary-Treasurer shall notify the Board and, in
case they cannot make provision to raise the shortage, he shall pay each
claimant in proportion to the amount of his pension.

Art. IV. (1) Superannuated preachers who have served in the itinerancy
for ten or more years, shall receive a pension of not more than $250.00
nor less than $150.00.

2. Superannuated preachers who have served in the itinerancy from five
to ten years, shall receive a pension of not more than $150, nor less
than $100.

3. Superannuated preachers who have served from one to five years in the
itinerancy shall receive not more than $100, nor less than $65.

Art. V. (1) The widow of an itinerant or superannuated preacher with
children, under fourteen years of age, shall receive the same pension as
her husband until the children are fourteen years old.

2. The widow of an active or superannuated preacher without children
shall receive one half the pension allowed her husband so long as she
remains in good standing in the C. M. E. Church.

3. When the father and mother of children under fifteen years of age
die, the children shall receive the same pension allowed widows under
section 2.

Art. VI. The Bishop presiding shall appoint a representative in each
Annual Conference, who shall collect and send to the Secretary-Treasurer,
the following items:

 (1) The name of each Superannuated preacher, his age and term of active
 service in the ministry.

 (2) Name of each widow, number and age of children; time the husband of
 each widow served in the active service.

 (3) Name and age of children whose father and mother are dead; time
 father served in active ministry.

 (4) The name, time of service, name of widow, and number of children of
 each preacher whose death is reported at each session of the Annual
 Conference.




 CHAPTER XLV.
 MISCELLANEOUS


CHILDREN'S DAY.

Ques. What directions are given concerning Children's Day?

Ans. 1. There shall be held annually throughout the Church, a day to be
known as Children's Day.

2. The exercises of this day shall consist of appropriate services held
in all our congregations for the especial benefit of the children.

3. The first collection at every service on that day shall be for the
cause of education.

4. Each Annual Conference shall decide as to which of the recognized
connectional schools the money raised for education on this day shall be
appropriated.

5. Each Annual Conference shall reserve the right to fix its Children's
Day.


II. GENERAL MISSIONARY DAY

The second Sunday in August of each year shall be observed in every
pastoral charge throughout the connection as General Missionary Day. On
said day the congregation should be asked to make an offering for the
extension of our Church. Presiding Elders and pastors in charge should
put forth every effort to make this day a success.


III. OFFICIAL OR LEADERS' MEETING

Ques. 1. What directions are given concerning Official or Leaders'
Meetings?

Ans. 1. They shall be held weekly in every pastoral charge wherever
practicable.

2. The Official Meeting shall be composed of the pastor in charge, all
the Stewards, Class-leaders and Local Preachers of the circuits,
stations or mission, over which the pastor or some one appointed by him
shall preside.

3. The following shall be the general order of business:

 (a) Are there any sick?

 (b) Are there any who require temporal relief?

 (c) Are there any who walk disorderly and will not be reproved?

 (d) Are there any who wilfully neglect the means of grace?

 (e) Are there any to be recommended for license to exhort?

 (f) What amount has been raised for the pastor in charge?

 (g) What amount has been raised for the Presiding Elder?

 (h) Is there any other business?


IV. THE WESTERN INDEX

1. The Western Index shall be published weekly at such place as the
Editor and a special committee may determine. The subscription price
shall be one ($1.00) dollar per annum. The Editor shall be elected by
the General Conference, and the special committee shall be composed of
one member selected by each Annual Conference West of the Mississippi
River.

2. The paper shall be under the management of the General Committee or
Publishing Interest and the Editor.

3. The Editor shall serve an appointment, and the General Committee
shall supplement the salary received from such appointment by paying him
six hundred ($600.00) dollars per annum.

4. All expenses incurred in running the Western Index shall be paid out
of subscriptions to, and advertisements in, the paper.

5. The Editor shall keep an account of the receipts and expenditures of
the paper and report the same to the General Committee. He shall
purchase no property nor printing presses unless authorized by the
General Committee in its regular meeting. Any such contract or
obligation made without authority of the Committee shall be on the
Editor's personal responsibility, and the Committee shall in no case be
responsible for any such obligation.


V. THE EASTERN INDEX

The Eastern Index shall be under similar management and subject to the
same rules and regulations as the Western Index.




 CHAPTER XLVI.
 SCHOOLS, COLLEGES OR UNIVERSITIES


1. The General Conference or any Annual Conference or Conferences of the
Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America shall have the right to
establish and maintain, Schools, Colleges or Universities for
educational purposes, which shall at all times be under control and
subject to the Discipline, usage and ministerial appointments of this
Church as now exist, or as from time to time authorized and declared by
said General, or Annual Conference or Conferences, providing no
additional schools, colleges or university shall be created without the
consent of the Educational Board after June first, 1914.

2. The Schools, Colleges or Universities established, or maintained by
the General, or Annual Conference or Conferences of the Colored
Methodist Episcopal Church in America shall be managed, operated or
conducted by a Board of Trustees of which the Bishop of this Church in
charge of the Annual Conference in whose bounds the same is located
shall be President; which Board shall consist of not less than three nor
more than ————; who shall be ministers of the Gospel or laymen of this
Church in good standing and who shall, at all times, be amenable to and
subject to removal by the General, Annual Conference or Conferences
appointing them; said Trustees to be elected and held in accordance with
the laws of the State or Territory in which the School, College or
University, for which they were elected, is located in case of such
laws, but if none then in accordance with such rules as may be
prescribed by the General or Annual Conference, or Conferences
appointing them.

3. The Trustees of any school, college or university may, or shall, when
authorized or directed by the General, or Annual Conference or
Conferences of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America
establishing or maintaining the same or appointing them, incorporate
under the laws of the State or Territory in which it may be located,
such corporation, however, to be under control of said Church and the
Trustees thereof, of either, officers to be elected, to be appointed or
elected by the General or Annual Conference in whose bounds any school
or college is located. The President to be subject or amenable thereto
at all times and may be removed by the same at any time.

4. The Board of Trustees, of which the Bishop in charge of the Annual
Conference is located is President, shall appoint or elect such officers
and teachers for same as are necessary and proper and as are usually had
by like institutions, such officers, however, to be subject to rejection
or removal by the General or Annual Conference or Conferences,
establishing or maintaining such Schools, Colleges or Universities.

5. The Board of Trustees of which the Bishop in charge of the Annual
Conference in which any school, college or university is located shall
be President, conducting or operating any school, college or university
established or maintained by the General or Annual Conference or
Conferences of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America shall
make all necessary and proper rules and regulations for governing the
same, subject, however, to the rejection or revision of such General or
Annual Conference or Conferences at any time, and may grant diplomas to
students thereof who have pursued the prescribed course of study and
confer degrees of every nature as are usually conferred by like
institutions.

6. The Board of Trustees may acquire by purchase or gift, necessary land
and erect necessary buildings thereon and purchase the necessary
equipment for any School, College or University, operated by them for
the General or Annual Conference or Conferences, and to this end
contract indebtedness and borrow money and pledge or mortgage any
property held by them for the use of or benefit of the General
Conference or Annual Conference or Conferences establishing and
maintaining such, provided, however, that no property held by said
trustees, shall be pledged or mortgaged without the indorsement in
writing on the instrument pledging or mortgaging the same, of the Bishop
in charge of the Annual Conference in whose bounds such School, College
or University is located, which shall be witnessed or acknowledged by
him in accordance with the law of the State or Territory in which said
property is located.

7. The Trustees of any School, College, or University established or
maintained by the General, Annual Conference or Conferences of the
Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America may acquire by purchase
and hold, or receive by gift or bequest and hold real, mixed or personal
property and hold in action for the use and benefit of said Church for
educational purposes in connection with and for the benefits of such
School, College, or University as an endowment or for any legitimate
purposes of the same.

8. All deeds of conveyance or any property conveyed for the General or
Annual Conference or Conferences of the Colored Methodist Church in
America for educational purposes shall have the following clause
inserted in the proper place "In trust that said premises shall be used,
kept, maintained and disposed of for educational purposes for the
Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America; subject to the usage, and
ministerial appointments of said Church, as from time to time authorized
and declared by the General Conference of said Church and the Annual
Conference or Conferences operating and maintaining such school, College
or University."

9. The Trustees of any property belonging to any school, College or
University of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in America, with
the consent of any Bishop of this Church in charge of the Annual
Conference in whose bounds such property is located, which is to be
indorsed upon the deed of conveyance in writing and acknowledged as
deeds are acknowledged in the State or Territory in which such property
is located shall have power to sell or dispose of the same when it is no
longer necessary for such purposes or when it is deemed best or
expedient but shall hold and use the proceeds thereof for such School,
College or University, or of the General or Annual Conference or
Conferences establishing or maintaining the same to be turned over to
such whenever directed.

10. The Treasurer or Custodian of any money or negotiable instruments
belonging to any School, College or University operated or maintained by
the General Conference or Annual Conference or Conferences shall be
required by the Trustees thereof to give adequate bond for the faithful
performance of his duties as such and for the proper accounting for and
deliverance or payment to the persons authorized to be paid by said
Trustees of all such money or negotiable instruments so held.

11. All Schools, Colleges or Universities established, or which are now
being maintained and operated, by the General Conference or any Annual
Conference or Conferences of the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church in
America and all property held for the use and benefit of, or subject to
the Discipline, usage and ministerial appointments of said Church, come
under the operation hereof and shall be governed hereby and the Trustees
thereof shall have all the authority and powers herein conferred, except
where the same may be restricted, by law, or by Charter, or by
instrument conveying property so as to prevent this chapter from
becoming effective, and all Trustees of such, wherever it can reasonably
be done are hereby directed, required, authorized and empowered to take
such steps and adopt such measure as is necessary to bring into effect
this Chapter.




 CHAPTER XLVII.
 FOUNDERS DAY


Be it resolved, first, That we set apart the Sunday nearest the
sixteenth of September each year, as Founder's Day, to be observed in
the Sunday-schools, Epworth Leagues, and by the Pastors and
Congregations throughout the Connection.

Second, That programs be arranged and suitable services held in every
charge throughout the connection. In every service effort should be
directed to acquaint the public with the history of our Church, and to
inspire the youth with its hope and prospects of the future.

Third, That the collections raised in the Sunday Schools and Epworth
Leagues, shall be used for suffering churches in populous centers—as
Kansas City, Savannah, Ga., Miles Memorial, Jacksonville, Fa., Israel
Metropolitan and Berkeley, Cal.

Fourth, That the money from the Leagues and Sunday Schools shall be sent
to the Book Agent, subject to the Bishop of the district, and reported
by him at the mid-winter meeting. It shall then be subjected to the
Publishing Board to be applied to the churches above listed in
proportions to the amount due on each and its importance to the
Connection.




 CHAPTER XLVIII.
 NAMES AND BOUNDARIES OF CONFERENCES.


Alabama Conference.—Bounded on the North by the Southern Railroad,
running from Meridian, Miss., to Selma, Ala., and thence on a straight
line to Georgia; on the East by Georgia; on the West by Mississippi, and
on the South by the Gulf of Mexico and Florida.

Arkansas Conference.—Bounded by the State lines North of the Arkansas
River, with an imaginary line running to the Indian Territory and to
Perry County. The Arkansas Conference includes all territory in the
Northeastern part of the state not included in the Little Rock
Conference.

Central Alabama Conference.—Bounded on the North by the Mobile and Ohio
Railroad from the line of Mississippi to Tuscaloosa, Alabama, thence
along the Alabama Great Southern Railroad to Birmingham, thence along
the Southern Railroad to the State line of Georgia; on the East by
Georgia; on the West by Mississippi, and on the South by the Alabama
Conference; Northport to be included in the Central Alabama Conference.

Central Georgia Conference.—Bounded on the North by the southern
boundary line of the Georgia Conference; East by the State line; West by
Flint River; South by the South Georgia Conference.

Central Texas Conference.—Beginning at the Northeast corner of Rockwall
County, running thence East on parallel 33, across Hunt County, thence
Southeast to the M. K. & T. H. R. R. (including South Greenville and
Lone Oak in the Central Texas Conference) down to the T. & P. R. R.,
thence East on the T. & P. R. R. to the 95th meridian, then South to
Troupe leaving out the Winona Circuit. Thence North from Troupe, up the
I. & G. N. railroad to Longview, thence Southeast down to Tenaha,
leaving Beckville Circuit, Carthage Circuit and Post Oak in the East
Texas Conference; thence East to the Louisiana state line, beginning
from Logansport, La., running West along the Northern boundary lines of
the Shelby and Nacogdoches counties and an imaginary line running across
Chewokee County to the Naches river (including Lynflat Circuit) thence
up to the Naches river to the I. & G. N. R. R., thence South on the I.
G. & N. R. R. to Galveston (Houston, Galveston, Trinity and Sunnyside
Circuit not included in the Central Texas Conference.) The Southern
boundary shall be the Gulf of Mexico and the Rio Grande. The Western
boundary of the Central Texas Conference begins at the Northeast corner
of Rockwall County and follows the Eastern boundary of the West Texas
Conference to Corsicana, thence along the Southern boundary of the West
Texas Conference to the Rio Grande River.

East Texas Conference.—Bounded on the North by Oklahoma; East by
Arkansas and Louisiana to the H. E. & W. T. Railroad; West by the H. E.
& W. T. Railroad to Lufkin, thence West by an imaginary line to the East
boundary line of Anderson County to Trinity River. Texarkana is not
included in the East Texas Conference. The H. E. & W. T. Railroad shall
not include any part of Timpson circuit.

East Florida Conference.—Bounded on the West by the Aucilla River, and
including all that part of the State East of said river.

El Paso-Pacific Mission Conference shall include the following territory
to wit: The Pacific Slope from Canada to Mexico, Nevada, New Mexico,
Arizona and such portions of Texas as lies West of the line beginning at
the northeast boundary of Winkler County, and extending East on the
eastern boundary line of Ward, Reems, Jeff Davis and Presadion counties
to the Rio Grande River.

Florida Conference.—Includes all that part of the State of Florida West
of the Aucilla River.

Georgia Conference.—Bounded on the North, East and West by the State
line; South by the southern boundary line of the following counties:
Richmond, Warren, Hancock (except Sparta), Putnam, Jasper, Butts,
Spalding, Coweta and Heard.

Illinois Conference includes that part of Missouri South of St. Louis,
the State of Illinois and Lake County, Tennessee.

Kentucky and Ohio Conference.—Bounded on the North by the northern
boundary line of the State of Ohio; West by the L. & N. Railroad,
running from Bowling Green to Elizabethtown, thence to the I. C.
Railroad to Cecilia, thence to the I. C. Railroad to Louisville; East
and South of the State line.

Louisiana Conference.—Bounded on the North by Arkansas; on the East by
the Mississippi River; on the West by Texas; on the South by an
imaginary line beginning at the mouth of Red River and running West
across the State.

Little Rock Conference.—Bounded by all that part of Arkansas South of
the Arkansas River, with an imaginary line running to Oklahoma and to
Perry County; also including the city of Texarkana. Little Rock
Conference embraces all other territory of the state not included in the
Arkansas and Southwest Arkansas Conferences.

Memphis-Jackson Conference.—Bounded on the East by the Tennessee River;
on the South by the State of Mississippi; on the West by the Miss.
River; on the North by a straight line running parallel with the general
course of the L. & N. R. R. to the Tennessee River.

Missouri and Kansas Conference.—Bounded on the East by the Southeast
Missouri and Illinois Conference; West by the western boundary line of
the State of Colorado; North by Wyoming; South by Oklahoma; said
Conference to include the State of Colorado.

Mississippi Conference.—Bounded on the North by 34th parallel of North
latitude and North Mississippi Conference; on the East by Alabama; on
the South by the line beginning at the southwest corner of Kemper County
and running between Lauderdale between Neshoba, Newton, Leake, Scott,
and North between Scott and Leake to Pearl River; then Pearl River due
west to the town of Canton, then west with the south corporation line to
the Black River, then northeast with Black River between Madison and
Yazoo Counties to Holmes County, then on the line between Yazoo and
Holmes to Washington County, then on a line between Washington and Yazoo
counties to Sharkey County, then with the line between Sharkey and Yazoo
counties to Issaquena and Sharkey to the southwest corner of Sharkey,
due west to the post office or town of Arcadia.

Mississippi Mission Conference.—Bounded on the North by the Mississippi
Conference; on the East by Alabama; South by the Gulf of Mexico and
Louisiana; on the West by Louisiana and the Mississippi River.

Muskogee Conference.—Bounded on the East by Arkansas; on the North by
the State line of Kansas so as to include Coffeyville; on the West by
Texas, and on the South by Oklahoma Conference; Spiro to be included.

New Orleans Conference.—Bounded on the North by the Louisiana
Conference; on the East by the Mississippi River; on the West by Texas;
on the South by the Gulf of Mexico.

North Alabama Conference.—Bounded on the North by Tennessee; on the East
by Georgia; on the West by Mississippi, and on the South by the Central
Alabama Conference; and includes all that portion of the State of
Alabama not included in the Alabama and Central Alabama Conferences.

North Carolina Conference includes the State of North Carolina.

N. Mississippi Conference.—Bounded on the North by Tennessee; on the
East by Alabama; on the South by the 34th parallel of north latitude,
which runs with the south line of the corporation of the town of Okolona
in the county of Chickashaw, and between Charleston on the North and
Tillatoba on the South. The former in Tallahatchie and the latter in
Yallabusha, with Sumner in the Mississippi Conference and Dublin in the
North Mississippi Conference to the Mississippi River, and on the West
by the Mississippi River.

Oklahoma Conference.—Bounded on the East by Arkansas; on the South by
Red River; West by Texas, and North by a line beginning at Harrington
and running East to Okafushee to south line of Muskogee Conference.

South Carolina Conference includes the State of South Carolina.

Southwest Arkansas Conference begins at the Northwestern boundary of
Howard County and runs eastward along the Northern boundary of Howard
County to Hot Springs County; thence South along the Eastern boundary of
Clark County to Dallas County; thence across the Northern boundary of
Dallas County to the Saline River; thence Southward along the river to
the Louisiana state line; thence West to the line of Texas.

South Georgia Conference.—Bounded on the North and East by the northern
boundary line of Troupe and Merriwether Counties to Flint River, running
South to Dooly County along northern boundary line of Dooly County to
Oconee River; down the Oconee River to the Altamaha River, along this
river to the State line; South by Florida; West by Alabama.

Southwest Georgia Conference includes all the territory of the state not
included in the Georgia, Central Georgia and South Georgia Conferences.

Tennessee Conference.—Bounded on the North by the State line; on the
South by Alabama; on the West by the West Tennessee Conference; on the
East by the State line.

Texas Conference.—Bounded on the North by the northern boundary lines of
the counties of Shelby and Nacogdoches, and an imaginary line running
across Cherokee County to the Naches River, including Woodville and Alto
circuits, then up the Naches River to the I. & G. N. Railroad; East by
the State line so as to take in Palestine and Wells; South by the Gulf
of Mexico; West by the Colorado River. Simpson circuit included in the
Texas Conference.

Washington and Philadelphia Conference includes the states of Virginia,
West Virginia, Maryland, New Jersey, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New York
and District of Columbia.

W. Tennessee Conference is bounded on the North by the Ohio River and
Kentucky; on the South by the general course of the L. & N. R. R.; on
the East by the Tennessee River and on the West by the Mississippi
River.

W. Kentucky Conference.—Bounded on the North by the Ohio River; West by
the Mississippi River; East by the Kentucky and Ohio Conference; South
by the State line.

West Texas Conference.—Bounded on the East by Grayson, Collins, Rockwell
and Dallas counties, down to the southern boundary line of Dallas County
to Trinity River, down to Cotton Belt Railroad; South by the East
boundary line of Navara and Freestone Counties to the I. & G. N.
Railroad to San Antonia and Austin (San Antonia to be included in the
West Texas Conference), on the Southern Pacific to Rio Grande River;
North by Red River to northern corner of Grayson County.




 =PART IX.=
 THE RITUAL




 CHAPTER XLIX.
 THE ORDER FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE LORD'S SUPPER


+The Elder shall read one or more of these sentences, during the reading
of which the stewards shall take up the collection for the poor:+

Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works
and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.—Matt. v. 16.

Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for
yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.—Matt. vi. 19,
20.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them;
for this is the law and the prophets.—Matt. vii. 12.

Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in
heaven.—Matt. vii. 21.

Zaccheus stood, and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my
goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by
false accusation, I restore him four-fold.—Luke xix. 8.

He which soweth sparingly shall reap sparingly; and he which soweth
bountifully shall reap also bountifully. Every man as he purposeth in
his heart, so let him give not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God
loveth a cheerful giver.—2 Cor. ix. 6, 7.

As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith.—Gal. vi. 10.

Godliness with contentment is great gain; for we brought nothing into
this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.—1 Tim. vi. 6, 7.

Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a
good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on
eternal life. 1 Tim. vi. 17, 18, 19.

God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which ye
have showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints,
and do minister.—Heb. vi. 10.

To do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such sacrifices God
is well pleased.—Heb. xiii. 16.

Whoso hath this world's goods, and seeth his brother have need, and
shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of
God in him?—1 John iii. 17.

He that hath pity upon the poor, lendeth unto the Lord; and that which
he hath given will he pay him again.—Prov. xix. 17.

Blessed is he that considereth the poor; the Lord will deliver him in
time of trouble.—Psalm xli. 1.

+Then shall the elder read this invitation+

Ye that do truly and earnestly repent of your sins, and are in love and
charity with your neighbors, and intend to lead a new life, following
the commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his holy ways,
draw near with faith, and take this holy sacrament to your comfort, and
make your humble confession to Almighty God, meekly kneeling upon your
knees.

+Then shall the general confession be made by the minister, in the name
of all those who are minded to receive the holy communion, both he and
all the people kneeling humbly upon their knees and saying:+

Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things,
Judge of all men, we acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and
wickedness, which we from time to time most grievously have committed,
by thought, word and deed, against thy Divine Majesty, provoking most
justly thy wrath and indignation against us. We do earnestly repent, and
are heartily sorry for these our misdoings; the remembrance of them is
grievous unto us. Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful
Father: for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake forgive us all that is
past, and grant that we may ever hereafter serve and please thee in
newness of life, to the honor and glory of thy name, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.

+Then shall the Elder say:+

O Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, who of thy great mercy hast
promised forgiveness of sins to all them that with hearty repentance and
true faith turn to thee; have mercy upon us; pardon and deliver us from
all our sins, confirm and strengthen us in all goodness, and bring us to
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.


THE COLLECT

Almighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from
whom no secrets are hid; cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the
inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and
worthily magnify thy holy name, through Christ our Lord.

Amen.

+Then shall the Elder say:+

It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all
times, and in all places, give thanks unto thee, O Lord, Holy Father,
Almighty, Everlasting God.

Therefore with angels and archangels, and with all the company of
heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising thee,
and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord, God of hosts, heaven and earth are
full of thy glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord most high.

Amen.

+Then shall the Elder say:+

We do not presume to come to this thy table, O merciful Lord, trusting
in our own righteousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies. We are
not worthy so much as to gather up the crumbs under thy table. But thou
art the same Lord, whose property is always to have mercy; Grant us,
therefore, gracious Lord, so to eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus
Christ, and to drink his blood that our sinful souls and bodies may be
made clean by his death, and washed through his most precious blood, and
that we may evermore dwell in him, and he in us.

Amen.

+Then the Elder shall say the prayer of consecration as followeth:+

Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, who of thy tender mercy didst give
thine only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the cross for our
redemption; who made there (by his oblation of himself once offered) a
full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for
the sins of the whole world; and did institute, and in his holy Gospel
command us to continue, a perpetual memory of that his precious death
until his coming again: hear us, O merciful Father, we most humbly
beseech thee, and grant that we, receiving these thy creatures of bread
and wine, according to thy Son our Saviour Jesus Christ's holy
institution, in remembrance of his death and passion, may be partakers
of his most blessed body and blood; who in the same night that he was
betrayed took bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave
it to his disciples, saying, Take, eat; this is my body which is given
for you: do this in remembrance of me. Likewise after supper he took the
cup; and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them saying, Drink ye
all of this; for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed
for you and for many, for the remission of sins; do this, as oft as ye
shall drink it, in remembrance of me.

Amen.

+Then shall the minister first receive the communion in both kinds
himself, and then proceed to deliver the same to the other minister in
like manner, if any be present. Then shall he say the Lord's Prayer, the
people still kneeling and repeating after him every petition:+

Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come;
thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven; give us this day our
daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who
trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil; for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory,
forever and ever.

Amen.

+Then a hymn may be sung, and the communicants shall be invited to the
table. The minister shall deliver both kinds to the people unto their
hands. When he delivereth the bread he shall say:+

The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for =thee=, preserve
=thy soul= and =body= unto everlasting life. Take and eat this in
remembrance that Christ died for =thee=, and feed on him in =thy heart=
by faith with thanksgiving.

+And the minister that delivereth the cup shall say:+

The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for =thee=, preserve
=thy soul= and =body= unto everlasting life. Drink this in remembrance
that Christ's blood was shed for thee, and be thankful.

+When all have communed, the minister shall return to the Lord's table,
and place upon it what remaineth of the consecrated elements, covering
the same with a fair linen cloth.+

+The minister may then say as followeth:+

O Lord and Heavenly Father, we thy humble servants desire thy fatherly
goodness mercifully to accept this our sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, most humbly beseeching thee to grant that, by the merits
and death of thy Son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood, we
and thy whole Church may obtain remission of our sins. And here we offer
and present unto thee, O Lord, ourselves, our souls and bodies, to be a
reasonable, holy and lively sacrifice unto thee; humbly beseeching thee
that all we who are partakers of this holy communion may be filled with
thy grace and heavenly benediction. And although we be unworthy, through
our manifold sins, to offer unto thee any sacrifice, yet we beseech thee
to accept this our bounden duty and service; not weighing our merits,
but pardoning our offenses, through Jesus Christ our Lord: by whom, and
with whom, in the unity of the Holy Ghost all honor and glory be unto
thee, O Father Almighty, world without end.

Amen.

+Then may be said:+

Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace, good-will toward men. We
praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we give
thanks to thee for thy great glory, O Lord God, heavenly King, God the
Father Almighty.

O Lord, the only begotten Son, Jesus Christ: O Lord God, Lamb of God,
Son of the Father, that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy
upon us. Thou that takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon
us. Thou that takest away the sins of the world, receive our prayer.
Thou that sittest at the right hand of God the Father, have mercy upon
us.

For thou only art holy: thou only art the Lord: thou only, O Christ,
with the Holy Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the Father.

Amen.

+Then the Elder, if he see it expedient, may put up an extemporaneous
prayer; and afterwards shall let the people depart with this blessing:+

May the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts
and minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ
our Lord; and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, be among you, and remain with you always.

Amen.

+If the Elder be straitened for time, he may omit any part of the
service except the prayer of consecration.+

+If the consecrated bread or wine be all spent before all have
communed, the Elder may consecrate more, by repeating the prayer of
consecration.+

+Let those who have scruples concerning the receiving of the communion
kneeling, be permitted to receive it either standing or sitting; but no
person shall be admitted to the Lord's Supper among us who is guilty of
any practice for which we would exclude a member of our Church.+




 CHAPTER L.
 THE MINISTRATION OF BAPTISM TO INFANTS.


+The minister, coming to the font, which is to be filled with pure
water, shall use the following, or some other suitable exhortation:+

Dearly beloved, forasmuch as all men are conceived and born in sin, and
that our Saviour Christ saith, Except a man be born of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: I beseech you to call
upon God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his
bounteous mercy he will grant to this =child= that which by nature =he=
cannot have; that =he= may be baptized with water and the Holy Ghost,
and received into Christ's holy Church, and be made a lively member of
the same.

+Then shall the minister say, Let us pray:+

Almighty and everlasting God, we beseech thee for thine infinite
mercies, that thou wilt look upon =this child=; wash =him= and sanctify
=him= with the Holy Ghost that =he=, being delivered from thy wrath, may
be received into the ark of Christ's Church, and being steadfast in
faith, joyful through hope, and rooted in love, may so pass the waves of
this troublesome world, that finally =he= may come to the land of
everlasting life, there to reign with thee, world without end, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

O merciful God, grant that the old Adam in =this child= may be so
buried, that the new man may be raised up in =him=.

Amen.

Grant that all carnal affections may die in =him=, and that all things
belonging to the Spirit may live and grow in =him=.

Amen.

Grant that =he= may have power and strength to have victory, and to
triumph against the devil, the world, and the flesh.

Amen.

Grant that whosoever is dedicated to thee by our office and ministry may
also be endued with heavenly virtues, and everlastingly rewarded through
thy mercy, O blessed Lord God, who dost live and govern all things,
world without end.

Amen.

Almighty, ever-living God, whose most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ,
for the forgiveness of our sins did shed out of his most precious side
both water and blood, and gave commandment to his disciples that they
should go teach all nations, and baptize them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: regard, we beseech thee, the
supplications of thy congregation; and grant that =this child=, now to
be baptized, may receive the fullness of thy grace, and ever remain in
the number of thy faithful and elect children, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.

+Then shall the people stand up, and the minister shall say:+

Hear the words of the Gospel written by St. Mark in the tenth chapter,
at the thirteenth verse.

They brought young children to Christ, that he should touch them. And
his disciples rebuked those that brought them; but when Jesus saw it, he
was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God.
Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as
a little child, he shall not enter therein. And he took them up in his
arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them.

+Then the minister, addressing the parents or others presenting the
child, shall say:+

In causing =this child= to be brought by baptism into the Church of
Christ, it is your duty to teach =him= to renounce the devil and all his
works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires
of the same, and the carnal desires of the flesh, so that =he= may not
follow or be led by them; to believe all the articles of the Christian
faith; and to obediently keep God's holy will and commandments all the
days of =his= life.

+Then the minister shall take the child into his hands, if convenient,
and say to the friends of the child:+

NAME THIS CHILD

N., I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

Amen.

+The minister may, at his discretion, lay hands on the subject,
accompanying the act with a suitable invocation, and then, all kneeling,
close with extemporaneous devotions and the Lord's Prayer:+

Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come;
thy will be done on earth, as it is heaven; give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Amen.




 CHAPTER LI.
 THE MINISTRATION OF BAPTISM TO SUCH AS ARE OF RIPER YEARS.


+The minister, coming to the font, which is to be filled with pure
water, shall use the following, or some other suitable exhortation:+

Dearly beloved, forasmuch as all men are conceived and born in sin, (and
that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and they that are in the flesh
cannot please God, but live in sin, committing many actual
transgressions,) and that our Saviour Christ saith, Except a man be born
of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God; I
beseech you to call upon God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ,
that of his bounteous goodness he will grant to =these persons= that
which by nature =they= cannot have: that =they= may be baptized with
water and the Holy Ghost, and received into Christ's holy Church, and be
made lively =members= of the same.

+Then shall the minister say:+

Almighty and immortal God, the aid of all that need, the helper of all
that flee to thee for succor, the life of them that believe, and the
resurrection of the dead: we call upon thee for =these persons= now to
be baptized. Receive =them=, O Lord, as thou hast promised by thy
well-beloved Son, saying, Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: so give now unto us that
ask; let us that seek find; open the gate unto us that knock; that
=these persons= may enjoy the everlasting benediction of thy heavenly
washing, and may come to the eternal kingdom which thou hast promised by
Christ our Lord.

Amen.

+Then shall the people stand up, and the minister shall say:+

Hear the words of the Gospel, written by St. John in the third chapter,
beginning at the first verse.

There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that
thou art a teacher come from God; for no man can do these miracles that
thou doest, except God be with him. Jesus answered and said unto him,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again he cannot
see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born
when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and
be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man
be born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of
the Spirit is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born
again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound
thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth; so
is every one that is born of the Spirit.

+Then the minister shall speak to the persons to be baptized on this
wise:+

Well-beloved, who are come hither, desiring to receive holy baptism, =ye
have= heard how the congregation hath prayed that our Lord Jesus Christ,
would vouchsafe to receive =you=, and bless =you=, to release =you= of
your sins, to give =you= the kingdom of heaven, and everlasting life.
And our Lord Jesus Christ hath promised in his holy word to grant all
those things that we have prayed for; which promise he for his part will
most surely keep and perform.

Wherefore after this promise made by Christ, =ye= must also faithfully,
for =your= part, promise, in the presence of this whole congregation,
that =ye= will renounce the devil and all his works, and constantly
believe God's holy word, and obediently keep his commandments.

+Then shall the minister demand of each of the persons to be baptized,
severally:+

Ques. Doth thou renounce the devil and all his works, the vain pomp and
glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, and the
carnal desires of the flesh, so that thou wilt not follow or be led by
them?

Ans. I renounce them all.

Ques. Dost thou believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and
earth? and in Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son, our Lord? and that he
was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary? that he
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried? that he
rose again the third day? that he ascended into heaven, and sitteth at
the right hand of God the Father Almighty, and from thence shall come
again at the end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead?

And dost thou believe in the Holy Ghost, the Church of God, the
communion of saints, the remission of sins, the resurrection of the
body, and everlasting life after death?

Ans. All this I steadfastly believe.

Ques. Wilt thou be baptized in this faith?

Ans. This is my desire.

Ques. Wilt thou then obediently keep God's holy will and commandments,
and walk in the same all the days of thy life?

Ans. I will endeavor so to do, God being my helper.

+Then shall the minister say:+

O merciful God, grant that the old Adam in =these= persons may be so
buried, that the new man may be raised up in =them=.

Amen.

Grant that all carnal affections may die in =them=, and that all things
belonging to the Spirit may live and grow in =them=.

Amen.

Grant that =they= may have power and strength to have victory, and to
triumph against the devil, the world, and the flesh.

Amen.

Grant that =they=, being here dedicated to thee by our office and
ministry, may also be endued with heavenly virtues, and everlastingly
rewarded, through thy mercy, O blessed Lord God, who dost live and
govern all things, world without end.

Amen.

Almighty, ever-living God, whose most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ
for the forgiveness of our sins, did shed out of his most precious side
both water and blood; and gave commandment to his disciples, that they
should go teach all nations, and baptize them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: regard, we beseech thee, the
supplications of this congregation; and grant that the =persons= now to
be baptized may receive the fullness of thy grace, and ever remain in
the number of thy faithful and elect children, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.

+Then shall the minister take each person to be baptized by the right
hand; and placing him conveniently by the font, according to his
discretion, shall ask the name; and then shall sprinkle or pour water
upon him, (or, if he shall desire it, shall immerse him in water),
saying:+

N., I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

Amen.

+The minister may, at his discretion, lay hands on the subject,
accompanying the act with a suitable invocation.+




 CHAPTER LII.
 FORM OF THE RECEPTION AND RECOGNITION OF CHURCH MEMBERS.


+The minister shall cause the candidates to be placed before the
congregation, and after baptizing any who may not have been previously
baptized he shall say:+

Brethren, the Church is of God, and will be preserved to the end of
time, for the promotion of his worship and the due administration of his
word and ordinances—the maintenance of Christian fellowship and
discipline—the edification of believers, and the conversion of the
world. All, of every age and station, stand in need of the means of
grace which it alone supplies; and it invites all alike to become
fellow-citizens with the saints and of the household of God. But as none
who have arrived at years of discretion can remain within its pales or
be admitted to its communion, without assuming its obligations, it is my
duty to demand of these persons present whether they are resolved to
assume the same.

+Then shall the minister address the candidates, as follows:+

Dearly beloved, you profess to have a desire to flee from the wrath to
come and to be saved from your sins; you seek the fellowship of the
people of God, to assist you in working out your salvation; I therefore
demand of you:

Do you solemnly, in the presence of God and this congregation, ratify
and confirm the promise and vow of repentance, faith, and obedience,
contained in the baptismal convent?

Ans. I do, God being my helper.

Will you be subject to the discipline of the Church, attend upon its
ordinances, and support its institutions?

Ans. I will endeavor so to do, by the help of God.

+The minister shall then say to the candidates:+

We rejoice to recognize you as members of the Church of Christ, and bid
you welcome to all its privileges; and in token of our brotherly love,
we give you the right hand of fellowship, and pray that you may be both
numbered with his people here, and with his saints in glory everlasting.

+The minister shall then say to the congregation:+

Brethren, I commend to your love and care these persons whom we this day
recognize as members of the Church of Christ. Do all in your power to
increase their faith, confirm their hope, and perfect them in love.

+Then may follow a hymn suitable to the occasion (as 881-889), and the
minister shall say:+

Let us pray.

Almighty God, we thank thee for founding thy Church, and promising that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. We bless thee for
calling us to the fellowship of thy people, and for numbering us with
the sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty. We especially praise thy
name for enabling these thy servants to avouch the Lord to be their God.
Help them to perform the promise and vow which they have made; to
renounce the devil, the world, and the flesh; to believe the record
which thou hast given of thy Son; and to walk in all thy commandments
and ordinances blameless, to the end of their lives. May their communion
with thy people be sanctified to their growth in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, being nourished and knit
together, increasing with the increase of God. May thy people do them
good, and may they prove a blessing to thy people. And grant, O Lord,
that all who are here members of thy militant Church, through thy mercy,
the merit of thy Son, and the grace of thy Spirit, may finally be made
members of thy triumphant Church in heaven.

Amen.

Almighty and everlasting God, Heavenly Father, we give thee humble
thanks, for that thou hast vouchsafed to call us to the knowledge of thy
grace, and faith in thee; increase this knowledge and confirm this faith
in us evermore. Give thy Holy Spirit to these persons, that they, being
born again, may be made heirs of everlasting salvation, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Spirit, now
and forever.

Amen.

Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come;
thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven; give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Amen.




 CHAPTER LIII.
 THE FORM OF SOLEMNIZATION OF MATRIMONY.


+At the day and time appointed for the solemnization of matrimony, the
persons to be married (having been qualified according to law) standing
together, the man on the right hand and the woman on the left, the
minister shall say:+

Dearly beloved, we are gathered together here in the sight of God, and
in the presence of these witnesses, to join together this man and this
woman in holy matrimony; which is an honorable estate, instituted of God
in the time of man's innocency, signifying unto us the mystical union
that is between Christ and his Church; which holy estate Christ adorned
and beautified with his presence, and first miracle that he wrought in
Cana of Galilee, and is commended of St. Paul to be honorable among all
men; and therefore is not by any to be enterprised, or taken in hand
unadvisedly, but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, and in the fear of
God.

Into which holy estate these two persons present come now to be joined.
Therefore if any can show any just cause why they may not lawfully be
joined together, let him now speak, or else hereafter forever hold his
peace.

+And also speaking unto the persons that are to be married, he shall
say:+

I require and charge you both, (as ye will answer at the dreadful day of
judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed) that if
either of you know any impediment why ye may not be lawfully joined
together in matrimony, ye do now confess it; for be ye well assured,
that so many as are coupled together otherwise than God's word doth
allow, are not joined together by God, neither is their matrimony
lawful.

+If no impediment be alleged, then shall the minister say unto the man:+

M., Wilt thou have this woman to be thy wedded wife, to live together
after God's ordinance, in the holy estate of matrimony? Wilt thou love
her, comfort her, honor, and keep her, in sickness and in health; and,
forsaking all other, keep thee only unto her, so long as ye both shall
live?

+The man shall answer,+

I WILL.

+Then shall the minister say unto the woman:+

N., Wilt thou have this man to be thy wedded husband, to live together
after God's ordinance, in the holy estate of matrimony? Wilt thou obey
him, serve him, love, honor, and keep him, in sickness and in health;
and, forsaking all other, keep thee only unto him, so long as ye both
shall live?

+The woman shall answer,+

I WILL.


+When the parties so desire, the man shall give unto the woman a ring;
and the minister taking the ring shall deliver it unto the man to put it
upon the fourth finger of the woman's left hand; and the man, holding
the ring there, and taught by the minister, shall say:+

With this ring I thee wed, and with all my worldly goods I thee endow;
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Amen.

+Then shall the minister say:+

Let us pray.

Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come;
thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven; give us this day our
daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who
trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil; for thine is the kingdom and the power, and the glory,
forever and ever.

Amen.

O eternal God, Creator and Preserver of all mankind, Giver of all
spiritual grace, the Author of everlasting life, send thy blessing upon
these thy servants, this man and this woman, whom we bless in thy name;
that as Isaac and Rebecca lived faithfully together, so these persons
may surely perform and keep the vow and covenant between them made, and
may ever remain in perfect love and peace together and live according to
thy laws, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

+Then shall the minister join their right hands together, and say:+

Those whom God hath joined together, let no man put asunder.

Forasmuch as M. and N. have consented together in holy wedlock, and have
witnessed the same before God and this company, and thereto have pledged
their faith either to other, and have declared the same by joining
hands, I pronounce that they are man and wife together, in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Amen.

+And the minister shall add this blessing:+

God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, bless, preserve, and
keep you; the Lord mercifully with his favor look upon you; and so fill
you with all spiritual benediction and grace, that ye may so live
together in this life, that in the world to come ye may have life
everlasting.

Amen.




 CHAPTER LIV.
 THE ORDER OF THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD


+The minister meeting the corpse, and going before it, shall say:+

I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth, and believeth in me,
shall never die.—John xi. 25, 26.

I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter
day upon the earth; and though after my skin worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for myself, and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another.—Job. xix. 25-27.

We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the
name of the Lord.—1 Tim. vi. 7; Job. i. 21.

+After they are come into the church or home shall be read Psalm xc.+

Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.

Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the
earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.

Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of men.

For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past,
and as a watch in the night.

Thou carriest them away as with a flood: they are as a sleep; in the
morning they are like grass which groweth up.

In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up; in the evening it is cut
down, and withereth.

For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.

Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light
of thy countenance.

For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a
tale that is told.

The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of
strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and
sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away.

Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is
thy wrath.

So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.

Return, O Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy
servants.

O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad all
our days.

Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us, and
the years wherein we have seen evil.

Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their
children.

And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us; and establish thou
the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou
it.

+Then shall follow the Lesson, 1 Cor. xv. 20-58, or the following
abridgement:+

Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them
that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ
shall all be made alive. But every man in his own order: Christ the
first-fruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. Then
cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even
the Father; when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and
power. For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. For he hath put all
things under his feet—But some man will say, How are the dead raised up?
and with what body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is
not quickened except it die: and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not
that body that shall be, but bare grain; it may chance of wheat, or of
some other grain; but God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and
to every seed his own body. All flesh is not the same flesh; but there
is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes,
and another of birds. There are also celestial bodies, and bodies
terrestrial; but the glory of the terrestrial is one and the glory of
the celestial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and another
glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star
differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the
dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown
in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised
in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body.—Behold, I show you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where is thy sting?
O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the
strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, my beloved brethren,
be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

+Here may follow a suitable hymn, a sermon or exhortation, and an
extemporary prayer.+

+At the grave, when the corpse is laid in the earth, the minister shall
say:+

Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble. He
cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as a shadow,
and continueth not.

In the midst of life we are in death: of whom may we seek for succor,
but of thee, O Lord, who for our sins art justly displeased?

Yet, O Lord God most holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful
Saviour, deliver us not into the bitter pains of eternal death.

Thou knowest, Lord, the secrets of our hearts: shut not thy merciful
ears to our prayers, but spare us, O holy and merciful Saviour, thou
most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not at our last hour for any pains
of death to fall from thee.

+Then the minister may say:+

Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God, in his wise providence, to
take out of this world the soul of our deceased =brother=, we therefore
commit =his= body to the ground, earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to
dust; looking for the general resurrection in the last day, and the life
of the world to come, through our Lord Jesus Christ; at whose second
coming in glorious majesty to judge the world, the earth and the sea
shall give up their dead; and the corruptible bodies of those who sleep
in him shall be changed, and made like unto his own glorious body,
according to the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself.

+Then shall be said:+

I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labors.

+A suitable hymn may here be sung; and then shall the minister say:+

Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come;
thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven; give us this day our
daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who
trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil.

Amen.


THE COLLECT.

O merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
resurrection and the life; in whom whosoever believeth shall live,
though he die; and whosoever liveth and believeth in him, shall not die
eternally: we meekly beseech thee, O Father, to raise us from the death
of sin unto the life of righteousness; that when we shall depart this
life we may rest in him and at the general resurrection on the last day
may be found acceptable in thy sight, and receive that blessing which
thy well-beloved Son shall then pronounce to all that love and fear
thee, saying, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Grant this, we
beseech thee, O merciful Father, through Jesus Christ our Mediator and
Redeemer.

Amen.

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all.

Amen.




 CHAPTER LV.
 FORM OF LAYING THE CORNER STONE OF A CHURCH


+At the time and place of laying the corner stone, let the minister
cause a suitable hymn to be sung (e. g. 780, 781, or 782). Then shall
the minister say:+

+Let us pray.+

Almighty and everlasting God, thou art infinite in all thy perfections,
and marvelous in all thy works. Thou hast made the world and all things
therein; and seeing that thou art Lord of heaven and earth, thou
dwellest not in temples made with hands; thou art a Spirit, and art
worshiped in spirit and in truth, in all places of thy dominion; yet we
thank thee that thou dost allow us to build houses for thy services,
wherein thy people may attend upon thee without distraction. We bless
thy holy name for putting it into the hearts of thy people to build a
house, at this place, for thy worship. We beseech thee to inspire us
with zeal, that we may both have a mind to the work, and may
successfully accomplish the same. May neither adversary nor evil
occurent hinder this work; but may the good hand of our God be upon us,
that in due time we may bring forth the headstone with joy and praise.
May this sanctuary, when completed, long remain a house of prayer for
all people, where incense shall be offered unto thy name, and a pure
offering, and thy word and ordinances by the influences of the Holy
Ghost. Here may multitudes be born again, and be nurtured in knowledge
and piety; so that they may be prepared, in the kingdom of thy glory. We
are unworthy, O Lord, through our manifold sins, to offer unto thee any
sacrifice; yet we beseech thee to accept this our bounden duty and
service, not weighing our merits, but pardoning our offenses, through
Jesus Christ our Lord: by whom and with whom, in the unity of the Holy
Ghost all honor and glory be unto thee, Father Almighty, world without
end.

Amen.

Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help; that in all our works, begun,
continued, and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy name, and finally,
by thy mercy, obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come;
thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven; give us this day our
daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who
trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us
from evil.

Amen.

+Then, shall the minister read, or cause to be read, the following
sentences:+

Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel our Father, forever and ever.

Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
victory, and the majesty; for all that is in the heaven and in the earth
is thine; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head
above all.

Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all; and in
thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make great,
and to give strength unto all.

Now, therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.

But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so
willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own
have we given thee.

For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were all our
fathers; our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding.

O Lord our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee a
house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand, and is all thine own.

I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart, and has pleasure in
uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of mine heart I have
willingly offered all these things; and now have I seen with joy thy
people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.

Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it;
except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.

Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and the glory unto their
children.

And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us; and establish thou
the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou
it.

His foundation is in the holy mountains.

The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation.

This is my rest forever: here will I dwell: for I have desired it.

I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with
bread.

I will also clothe her priests with salvation, and her saints shall
shout aloud for joy.

The stone which the builders refused is become the head-stone of the
corner.

This is the Lord's doing; it is marvelous in our eyes.

For other foundation can no man lay than is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

+Then shall the minister, standing by the stone, announce the articles
to be deposited therein. These may be a copy of the Bible, the Hymn
Book, the Discipline, Church periodicals, a document setting forth the
name of the Church, with the names of the pastor, trustees, and building
committee, and such other articles as may be desired. The stone shall be
laid by the minister, or some one appointed by him; and placing his hand
upon the stone, the minister shall say:+

We lay this corner stone of a house to be built and set apart, from all
worldly uses, for divine worship, in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Amen.

+Then may follow an address, the collection (if any) the Doxology, and
Benediction.+




 CHAPTER LVI.
 FORM OF THE DEDICATION OF A CHURCH


+Let the service be conducted as on the other occasions of public
worship—only the hymns (e. g. 783-780,) prayer, lesson, and sermons,
should be adapted to the occasion. The lessons may be Gen. xxviii.
10-22, and Heb. x. 19-25, or any other at the discretion of the
minister.+


FIRST LESSON. GEN. xxviii. 10-22.

And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran. And he lighted
upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was
set; and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his
pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep. And he dreamed, and
behold, a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to
heaven; and behold, the angels of God ascending and descending on it.
And behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of
Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac; the land whereon thou liest,
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be as the
dust of the earth; and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the
east, and to the north, and to the south; and in thee and in thy seed
shall all the families of the earth be blessed. And behold, I am with
thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will
bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have
done that which I have spoken to thee of. And Jacob, awaked out of his
sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is in this place; and I knew it not.
And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this is none
other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. And Jacob
rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his
pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
And he called the name of that place Bethel; but the name of that city
was called Luz at the first. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will
be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me
bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my father's
house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God: and this stone, which I
have set for a pillar, shall be God's house; and of all that thou shalt
give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee.


SECOND LESSON. HEB. x. 19-25.

Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for
us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh; having an high-priest
over the house of God; let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast to the
profession of our faith without wavering: for he is faithful that
promised: and let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to
good works; not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the
manner of some is; but exhorting one another; and so much the more, as
ye see the day approaching.

+The Collection (if any) may follow the sermon. The officers of the
Church shall then address the minister in the following language:+

We present to you this house, to be set apart from all unhallowed or
common uses, for the worship of Almighty God.

+Then shall the minister request the congregation to stand, while he
pronounces the following Sentence of Dedication:+


SENTENCE OF DEDICATION

Forasmuch as God has put it into the hearts of his people to build this
house for his worship, and has blessed them in their undertaking, we
solemnly dedicate it to his service, for the reading and expounding of
his holy word, the administration of his ordinances, and for all other
acts of religious worship. That he may graciously accept this labor of
our hands, let us devoutly pray.

+Then shall be said, all kneeling:+

Almighty and everlasting God, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens,
cannot contain thee, much less this house which we have built; yet thou
dost humble thyself to behold the inhabitants of the earth, and dost
promise that in all places where thou dost record thy name thou wilt
meet with thy people, and bless them. Let thy name be recorded in this
place, and here let thine honor dwell. Preserve this house, which we set
apart to thy service, from injury and desecration. Accept the worship
which shall be here offered to thy name. Let thy Holy Spirit accompany
thy word and ordinances, which shall be here administered, so that they
may prove means of grace to all who shall receive the same. May many
sons and daughters be here born to the Lord Almighty. Let thy people be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and make them drink
of the river of thy pleasures. Let their children be here fed with food
convenient for them, and be brought up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord. Let living waters go forth from this sanctuary, carrying life
and joy to all around. Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy
glory unto their children, and let the beauty of the Lord our God be
upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us, yea the work
of our hands establish thou it. Now, therefore arise, O Lord God, into
thy resting place, thou and the ark of thy strength; let thy ministers
be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness. We
beseech thee, O Lord, to overlook our unworthiness, forgive our sins,
and make us a habitation of God through the Spirit. We offer all our
offerings through the ever-blessed name of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, to whom, with thee, and the Holy Spirit, be glory and majesty,
dominion and power, both now and ever.

Amen.

+The service may then be concluded with the Doxology and Benediction.+




 CHAPTER LI.
 THE FORM AND MANNER OF ORDAINING  DEACONS


+When the day appointed by the Bishop is come, after a suitable sermon
or exhortation, one of the Elders shall present unto the Bishop all them
that are to be ordained, and say:+

I present unto you these persons present, to be ordained Deacons.

+Then their names being read aloud, the Bishop shall say unto the
people:+

Brethren, if there be any of you who knoweth any impediment or crime in
any of these persons presented to be ordained Deacons; for the which he
ought not to be admitted to that office, let him come forth in the name
of God and show what the crime or impediment is.

+If any crime or impediment be objected, the Bishop shall surcease from
ordaining that person unto such time as the party accused shall be found
clear of that crime. Then shall be read the following collect.+


THE COLLECT.

Almighty God, who by thy divine providence hast appointed divers orders
of ministers in thy Church, and didst inspire thy apostles to choose
into the order of Deacons thy first martyr, St. Stephen, with others:
mercifully behold these thy servants, now called to the like office and
administration; replenish them so with the truth of thy doctrine, and
adorn them with innocency of life, that both by word and good example
they may faithfully serve thee in this office, to the glory of thy name,
and the edification of thy Church, through the merits of our Saviour
Jesus Christ, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost, now
and forever.

Amen.

+Then the Bishop or one of the Elders appointed by him, shall read the
Epistle.+


THE EPISTLE.   1 TIM. iii. 8-13.

Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not double tongued, not given to
much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre: holding the mystery of the faith
in a pure conscience. And let these also first be proved; then let them
use the office of a Deacon, being found blameless. Even so must their
wives be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things. Let the
Deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own
houses well. For they that have used the office of a Deacon well,
purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith
which is in Christ Jesus.

+Then shall the Bishop examine every one of those who are to be
ordained, in the press of the people, after this manner following:+

Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon
you the office of the ministry in the Church of Christ, to serve God for
the promoting of his glory and the edifying of his people?

Ans. I trust so.

The Bishop. Do you unfeignedly believe all the canonical Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament.

Ans. I do believe them.

The Bishop. Will you diligently read or expound the same unto the people
whom you shall be appointed to serve?

Ans. I will.

The Bishop. It appertaineth to the office of a Deacon to assist the
Elder in Divine service, and especially when he ministereth the holy
communion, to help him in the distribution thereof, and to read and
expound the Holy Scriptures: to instruct the youth; and in the absence
of the Elder to baptize.

And, furthermore, it is his office to search for the sick, poor, and
impotent, that they may be visited and relieved.

Will you do this gladly and willingly?

Ans. I will do so, by the help of God.

The Bishop. Will you apply all your diligence to frame and fashion your
own lives (and the lives of your families) according to the doctrine of
Christ; and to make both yourselves, and them, as much as in you lieth,
wholesome examples of the flock of Christ?

Ans. I will do so, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop. Will you reverently obey them to whom the charge and
government over you is committed, following with a glad mind and will
their godly admonitions?

Ans. I will endeavor so to do, the Lord being my helper.

+Then the Bishop, laying his hands severally upon the head of every one
of them, shall say:+

Take thou authority to execute the office of a Deacon in the Church of
God; in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Amen.

+Then shall the Bishop deliver to every one of them the Holy Bible,
saying:+

Take thou authority to read the Holy Scriptures in the Church of God,
and to preach the same.

+Then one of them appointed by the Bishop shall read the Gospel.+


THE GOSPEL. LUKE xii. 35-38.

Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye
yourselves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return
from the wedding, that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto
him immediately. Blessed are those servants whom the lord when he cometh
shall find watching. Verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself
and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.
And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch,
and find them so, blessed are those servants.

+Immediately before the benediction shall be said these Collects
following:+

Almighty God, giver of all good things, who of thy great goodness hast
vouchsafed to accept and take these thy servants into the office of
Deacons in thy Church: make them, we beseech thee, O Lord, to be modest,
humble, and constant in their ministration, and to have a ready will to
observe all spiritual discipline; that they having always the testimony
of a good conscience, and continuing ever stable and strong in thy Son
Christ, may so well behave themselves in this inferior office, that they
may be found worthy to be called unto the higher ministries in thy
Church, through the same thy Son our Saviour Jesus Christ; to whom be
glory and honor, world without end.

Amen.

Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help; that in all our works, begun,
continued, and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy name, and finally,
by thy mercy, obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.


The Benediction

The peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, our
Lord; and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, be among you, and remain with you always.

Amen.




 CHAPTER LVIII.
 THE FORM AND MANNER OF ORDAINING ELDERS.


+When the day appointed by the Bishop is come there shall be a sermon or
exhortation, declaring the duty and office of such as come to be
admitted Elders; how necessary that order is in the Church of Christ,
and also how the people ought to esteem them in their office. After
which one of the Elders shall present unto the Bishop all them that are
to be ordained, and say:+

I present unto you these persons present, to be ordained Elders.

+Then their names being read aloud, the Bishop shall say unto the
people:+

Brethren, these are they whom we purpose, God willing, this day to
ordain Elders. For after due examination, we find not to the contrary,
but that they are lawfully called to this function and ministry, and
that they are persons meet for the same. But if there be any of you who
know any impediment or crime in any of them, for the which he ought not
to be received into this holy ministry, let him come forth in the name
of God, and show what the crime or impediment is.

+If any crime or impediment be objected, the Bishop shall surcease from
ordaining that person, until such time as the party accused shall be
found clear of that crime.+

+Then shall be said the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel as followeth:+


THE COLLECT.

Almighty God, giver of all good things, who by thy Holy Spirit hast
appointed divers orders of ministers in thy Church, mercifully behold
these thy servants, now called to the office of Elder, and replenish
them so with the truth of thy doctrine, and adorn them with innocency of
life, that, both by word and good example, they may faithfully serve
thee in this office, to the glory of thy name, and the edification of
thy Church, through the merits of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who liveth
and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost, world without end.

Amen.


THE EPISTLE. EPH. iv. 7-13.

Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift
of Christ. Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. (Now that he ascended, what
is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the
earth? He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens, that he might fill all things.) And he gave some, apostles; and
some prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;
for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.


THE GOSPEL. ST. JOHN x. 1-16.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into
the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
robber. But he that entereth in by the door, is the shepherd of the
sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice; and he
calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth
forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for
they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee
from him: for they know not the voice of strangers. This parable spake
Jesus unto them, but they understood not what things they were which he
spake unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are
thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: by
me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and
find pasture. The thief cometh not but for to steal, and to kill, and to
destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have
it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his
life for the sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd,
whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the
sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep.
The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the
sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.
As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my
life for the sheep. And other sheep I have which are not of this fold:
them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be
one fold, and one shepherd.

+And that done, the Bishop shall say unto them as hereafter followeth:+

You have heard, brethren, as well in your private examination, (as in
the exhortation which was now made to you,) and in the holy lessons
taken out of the Gospel, and the writings of the apostles, of what
dignity, and of how great importance, this office is, whereunto ye are
called. And now again we exhort you, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that you have in remembrance into how high a dignity, and to how
weighty an office ye are called: that is to say, to be messengers,
watchmen, and stewards of the Lord; to teach, and to premonish, to feed
and provide for the Lord's family; to seek for Christ's sheep that are
dispersed abroad, and for his children who are in the midst of this evil
world, that they may be saved through Christ forever.

We have good hope that you have all weighed and pondered these things
with yourselves long before this time; and that you have clearly
determined, by God's grace, to give yourselves wholly to this office,
whereunto it hath pleased God to call you: so that, as much as lieth in
you, you will apply yourselves wholly to this one thing, and draw all
your cares and studies this way, and that you will continually pray to
God the Father, through the mediation of our only Saviour Jesus Christ,
for the heavenly assistance of the Holy Ghost: that by daily reading and
weighing of the Scriptures, ye may wax riper and stronger in your
ministry; and that ye may so endeavor yourselves from time to time to
sanctify the lives of you and yours, and to fashion them after the rule
and doctrine of Christ, that ye may be wholesome and godly examples and
patterns for the people to follow.

And now that this present congregation of Christ, here assembled, may
also understand your minds and wills in these things, and that this your
promise may the more move you to do your duties, ye shall answer plainly
to these things, which we, in the name of God and of his Church, shall
demand of you touching the same.

Do you think in your heart that you are truly called, according to the
will of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the order of Elders?

Ans. I think so.

The Bishop. Are you persuaded that the Holy Scriptures contain
sufficiently all doctrine required of necessity for eternal salvation
through faith in Jesus Christ? And are you determined, out of the said
Scriptures, to instruct the people committed to your charge, and to
teach nothing, as required of necessity to eternal salvation, but that
which you shall be persuaded may be concluded and proved by the
Scriptures?

Ans. I am so persuaded, and have so determined, by God's grace.

The Bishop. Will you then give your faithful diligence, always so to
minister the doctrine and sacraments, and the discipline of Christ, as
the Lord hath commanded?

Ans. I will so do, by the help of the Lord.

The Bishop. Will you be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and
drive away all erroneous and strange doctrines contrary to God's word;
and to use both public and private monitions and exhortations, as well
to the sick as to the whole within your charge, as need shall require,
and occasion shall be given?

Ans. I will, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop. Will you be diligent in prayers, and in reading of the Holy
Scriptures, and in such studies as help to the knowledge of the same,
laying aside the study of the world and the flesh?

Ans. I will endeavor so to do, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop. Will you be diligent to frame and fashion yourselves, and
your families, according to the doctrine of Christ; and to make both
yourselves and them, as much as in you lieth, wholesome examples and
patterns to the flock of Christ?

Ans. I shall apply myself thereto, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop. Will you maintain and set forward, as much as lieth in you,
quietness, peace, and love, among all Christian people, and especially
among them that are or shall be committed to your charge?

Ans. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop. Will you reverently obey your chief ministers, unto whom is
committed the charge and government over you; following with a glad mind
and will their godly admonitions, submitting yourselves to their godly
judgment?

Ans. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.

+Then shall the Bishop, standing up, say:+

Almighty God, who hath given you this will to do all these things, grant
also unto you strength and power to perform the same; that he may
accomplish his work which he hath begun in you, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.

+After this the congregation shall be desired secretly in their prayers
to make their humble supplications to God, for all these things: for
which prayers there shall be silence kept for a space.+

+After which shall be said by the Bishop, (the persons to be ordained
Elders all kneeling,) Veni, Creator, Spiritus: the Bishop beginning, and
the Elders and others that are present answering by verses, as
followeth:+

 Come, Holy Ghost, our souls inspire.
 =And lighten with celestial fire.=
 Thou the anointing Spirit art,
 =Who dost thy seven-fold gifts impart.=
 Thy blessed unction from above
 =Is comfort, life, and fire of love=.
 Enable with perpetual light
 =The dullness of our blinded sight=.
 Anoint and cheer our soiled face
 =With the abundance of thy grace=
 Keep for our foes, give peace at home
 =Where thou art guide no ill can come=
 Teach us to know the Father, Son.
 =And thee of both, to be but one=
 That through the ages all along,
 =This may be our endless song=;
 Praise to thy eternal merit,
 =Father, Son and Holy Spirit=.

+That done, the Bishop shall pray in this wise, and say, Let us pray+

Almighty God and Heavenly Father, who, of thine infinite love and
goodness toward us, hast given to us thy only and most dearly beloved
Son Jesus Christ to be our Redeemer, and the author of everlasting life;
who, after he had made perfect our redemption by his death, and was
ascended into heaven, sent abroad into the world his apostles, prophets,
evangelists, doctors and pastors; by whose labor and ministry he
gathered together a great flock in all parts of the world, to set forth
the eternal praise of thy holy name; for these so great benefits of thy
eternal goodness, and for that thou hast vouchsafed to call these thy
servants here present to the same office and ministry appointed for the
salvation of mankind, we render unto thee most hearty thanks: we praise
and worship thee; and we humbly beseech thee, by the same thy blessed
Son, to grant unto all who either here or elsewhere call upon thy holy
name, that we may continue to show ourselves thankful unto thee for
these, and all other, thy benefits; and that we may daily increase and
go forward in the knowledge and faith of thee and thy Son, by the Holy
Spirit: so that as well by these thy ministers, as by them over whom
they shall be appointed thy ministers, thy holy name may be forever
glorified, and thy blessed kingdom enlarged, through the same thy Son
Jesus Christ our Lord: who liveth and reigneth with thee, in the unity
of the same Holy Spirit, world without end.

Amen.

+When the prayer is done, the Bishop and the Elders present shall lay
their hands severally upon the head of every one that receiveth the
Order of Elders, the receivers humbly kneeling upon their knees, and the
Bishop saying,+

The Lord pour upon thee the Holy Ghost, for the office and work of an
Elder in the Church of God, now committed unto thee by the imposition of
our hands. And be thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God, and of
his holy sacraments: in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.

Amen.

+Then the Bishop shall deliver to every one of them kneeling, the Bible,
into his hands, saying:+

Take thou authority to preach the word of God, and to administer the
holy sacraments in the congregation.

+Then shall the Bishop say:+

Most merciful Father, we beseech thee to send upon these thy servants
thy heavenly blessing; that they may be clothed with righteousness, and
that thy word spoken by their mouths may have such success, that it may
never be spoken in vain. Grant also, that we may have grace to hear and
receive what they shall deliver out of thy most holy word, or agreeable
to the same, as the means of our salvation; that in all our words and
deeds we may seek thy glory, and the increase of thy kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help; that in all our works, begun,
continued, and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy name, and finally,
by thy mercy, obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.


THE BENEDICTION

The peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, our
Lord; and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, be among you, and remain with you always.

Amen.

+If on the same day the Order of Deacons be given to some, and that of
Elders to others, the Deacons shall be first presented, and then the
Elders. The Collects shall both be used; first that for Deacons, then
that for Elders. The Epistle shall be Eph. iv. 7 to 13, as before in
this office. Immediately after which, they that are to be ordained
Deacons shall be examined and ordained as is above prescribed. The one
of them having read the Gospel which shall be St. John x. 1-16, as
before in this office, they that are to be ordained Elders shall
likewise be examined and ordained, as in this office before appointed.+




THE FORM OF CONSECRATING A BISHOP.


THE COLLECT.

Almighty God, who by thy Son Jesus Christ didst give to thy holy
apostles many excellent gifts, and didst charge them to feed thy flock:
give grace, we beseech thee, to all the ministers and pastors of thy
Church, that they may diligently preach thy word, and duly administer
the godly discipline thereof; and grant to the people, that they may
obediently follow the same; that all may receive the crown of
everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

+Then shall be read by one of the Elders.+


THE EPISTLE. ACTS xx. 17-35.

From Miletus Paul sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church.
And when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know from the
first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you
at all seasons, serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with
many tears and temptations, which befell me by the laying in wait of the
Jews: and how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have
showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house,
testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And now, behold, I go bound
in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall
me there: save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city saying, that
bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me,
neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my
course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God. And now, behold, I
know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God,
shall see my face no more. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that
I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare
unto you all the counsel of God. Take heed, therefore, unto yourselves,
and to all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you
overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he hath purchased with his
own blood. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own
selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples
after them. Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three
years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. And now,
brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified. I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or
apparel. Yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have ministered unto
my necessities, and to them that were with me. I have showed you all
things, how that so laboring ye ought to support the weak, and to
remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to
give than to receive.

+Then another shall read+


THE GOSPEL. ST. JOHN xxi. 15-17.

Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than
these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord: thou knowest that I love thee. He
saith unto him, Feed my lambs. He saith to him again the second time,
Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord: thou
knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son
of Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the
third time, Lovest thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all
things, thou knowest that I love thee, Jesus saith unto him, Feed my
sheep.


OR THIS. ST. MATT, xxviii. 18-21

Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and
lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world.

+After the Gospel and sermon are ended, the elected person shall be
presented by two Elders unto the Bishop, saying:+

We present unto you this holy man, to be ordained a Bishop.

+Then the Bishop shall move the congregation to pray, saying thus to
them:+

Brethren, it is written in the Gospel of St. Luke, that our Saviour
Christ continued the whole night in prayer, before he did choose and
send forth his twelve apostles. It is written also in the Acts of the
Apostles, that the disciples who were at Antioch did fast and pray,
before they laid hands on Paul and Barnabas, and sent them forth. Let
us, therefore, following the example of our Saviour Christ, and his
apostles, first fall to prayer, before we admit and send forth this
person presented unto us, to the work whereunto we trust the Holy Ghost
hath called him.

+Then shall be said this prayer following:+

Almighty God, giver of all good things, who by the Holy Spirit hast
appointed divers orders of ministers in thy Church: mercifully behold
this thy servant, now called to the work and ministry of a Bishop; and
replenish him so with the truth of thy doctrine, and adorn him with
innocency of life, that, both by word and deed, he may faithfully serve
thee in this office, to the glory of thy name, and the edifying and
well-governing of thy Church, through the merits of our Saviour Jesus
Christ, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost, world
without end.

Amen.

+Then the Bishop shall say to him that is to be ordained:+

Brother, forasmuch as the Holy Scripture commands that we should not be
hasty in laying on hands, and admitting any person to government in the
Church of Christ, which he hath purchased with no less price than the
effusion of his own blood: before I admit you to this administration, I
will examine you on certain articles, to the end that the congregation
present may have a trial, and bear witness, how you are minded to behave
yourself in the Church of God.

Are you persuaded that you are truly called to this ministration,
according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ?

Ans. I am so persuaded.

The Bishop. Are you persuaded that the Holy Scriptures contain
sufficiently all doctrine required of necessity for eternal salvation,
through faith in Jesus Christ? And are you determined, out of the same
Holy Scriptures, to instruct the people committed to your charge; and to
teach or maintain nothing as required of necessity to eternal salvation,
but that which you shall be persuaded may be concluded and proved by the
same?

Ans. I am so persuaded, and determined, by God's grace.

The Bishop. Will you then faithfully exercise yourself in the same Holy
Scriptures, and call upon God by prayer for the true understanding of
the same, so as you may be able by them to teach and exhort with
wholesome doctrine, and to withstand and convince the gainsayers?

Ans. I will so do, by the help of God.

The Bishop. Are you ready with faithful diligence to banish and drive
away all erroneous and strange doctrines contrary to God's word, and
both privately and openly to call upon and encourage others to the same?

Ans. I am ready, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop. Will you deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; that you may
show yourself in all things an example of good works unto others, that
the adversary may be ashamed, having nothing to say against you?

Ans. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.

The Bishop. Will you maintain and set forward, as much as shall lie in
you, quietness, love, and peace among all men: and such as shall be
unquiet, disobedient, and criminal, within your district, correct and
punish according to such authority as you have by God's word, and as
shall be committed unto you?

Ans. I will so do, by the help of God.

The Bishop. Will you be faithful in ordaining, sending, or laying hands
upon others?

Ans. I will so be, by the help of God.

The Bishop. Will you show yourself gentle, and be merciful, for Christ's
sake, to poor and needy people, and to all strangers destitute of help?

Ans I will so show myself, by God's help.

+Then the Bishop shall say:+

Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, who hath given you a good will to do
all these things, grant also unto you strength and power to perform the
same; that, he accomplishing in you the good work which he hath begun,
you may be found perfect and irreprehensible at the last day, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

+Then shall Veni, Creator, Spiritus be said:+

 Come, Holy Ghost, our souls inspire.
 =And lighten with celestial fire.=
 Thou the anointing Spirit art,
 =Who dost thy seven-fold gifts impart.=
 Thy blessed unction from above
 =Is comfort, life and fire of love,=
 Enable with perpetual light
 =The dullness of our blinded sight.=
 Anoint and cheer our soiled face
 =With the abundance of thy grace.=
 Keep far our foes, give peace at home
 =Where thou art guide no ill can come.=
 Teach us to know the Father, Son,
 =And thee of both, to be but one=
 That through the ages all along,
 =This may be our endless song;=
 Praise to thy eternal merit,
 =Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.=

+That ended, the Bishop shall say+

Lord, hear our prayer.

Ans. =And let our cry come unto thee.=

+Bishop, let us pray.+

Almighty God and most merciful Father, who of thine infinite goodness
hast given thine only and dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ to be our
Redeemer, and the author of everlasting life; who, after that he had
made perfect our redemption by his death, and was ascended into heaven,
poured down his gifts abundantly upon men, making some apostles, some
prophets, some evangelists, some pastors and doctors to the edifying and
making perfect his Church: grant, we beseech thee, to this thy servant,
such grace that he may evermore be ready to spread abroad thy gospel,
the glad tidings of reconciliation with thee, and use the authority
given him, not to destruction, but to salvation; not to hurt but to
help; so that as a wise and faithful servant, giving to thy family their
portion in due season, he may at last be received into everlasting joy,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, who, with thee and the Holy Ghost, liveth
and reigneth, one God, world without end.

Amen.

+Then the Bishop and Elders present shall lay their hands upon the head
of the elected person, kneeling before them upon his knees, the Bishop
saying:+

The Lord pour upon thee the Holy Ghost, for the office and work of a
Bishop in the Church of God now committed unto thee by the imposition of
our hands; in the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.

Amen.

And remember that thou stir up the grace of God which is given thee; for
God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and love, and
soberness.

+Then the Bishop shall deliver him the Bible, saying:+

Give heed unto reading, exhortation, and doctrine. Think upon the things
contained in this book. Be diligent in them, that the increase coming
thereby may be manifest unto all men. Take heed unto thyself, and to thy
doctrine; for by so doing thou shalt both save thyself and them that
hear thee. Be to the flock of Christ a shepherd, not a wolf; feed them,
devour them not. Hold up the weak, heal the sick, bind up the broken,
bring again the outcasts, seek the lost. Be so merciful, that you may
not be too remiss; so minister discipline, that you forget not mercy;
that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, you may receive the
never-fading crown of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

+Immediately before the benediction shall be said the following prayer:+

Most merciful Father, we beseech thee to send down upon this thy servant
thy heavenly blessing; and so endue him with thy Holy Spirit, that he,
preaching thy word, may not only be earnest to reprove, beseech, and
rebuke with all patience and doctrine, but may also be to such as
believe a wholesome example, in word, in conversation, in love, in
faith, in chastity, and in purity; that, faithfully fulfilling his
course, at the latter day he may receive the crown of righteousness laid
up by the Lord, the righteous Judge, who liveth and reigneth, one God
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, world without end.

Amen.

Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help; that in all our works, begun,
continued, and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy name, and finally,
by thy mercy, obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.


THE BENEDICTION.

The peace of God, which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord; and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, be among you, and remain with you always.

Amen.




=APPENDIX.=




 CHAPTER I.
 BISHOPS AND GENERAL OFFICERS


BISHOPS

Bishop L. H. Holsey, D. D., 335 Auburn Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia.

Bishop Isaac Lane, D. D., 422 LaConte St., Jackson, Tennessee.

Bishop R. S. Williams, D. D., 912 Fifteenth Street, Augusta, Georgia.

Bishop E. Cottrell, D. D., Holly Springs, Mississippi.

Bishop C. H. Phillips, A. M., M. D., D. D., 123-14th Ave., Nashville,
Tennessee.

Bishop R. A. Carter, A. M., D. D., 398 Auburn Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia.

Bishop N. C. Cleaves, D. D., 633 S. Lauderdale St., Memphis, Tennessee.


GENERAL OFFICERS

Rev. J. A. Hamlett, A. B., Editor Christian Index, Jackson, Tennessee.

Rev. J. C. Martin, D. D., Agent, 109-11 Shannon St., Jackson, Tennessee.

Rev. J. C. Stanton, D. D., Editor Eastern Index, Pittsboro, North
Carolina.

Rev. J. R. Starks, D. D., Editor Western Index, Dallas, Texas.

Rev. R. S. Stout, D. D., LL. B., Secretary Church Extension, Pine Bluff,
Ark.

Rev. J. H. Moore, D. D., Secretary Missions, Holly Springs, Mississippi.

Rev. J. A. Bray, A. M., LL. D., D. D., Secretary Education, P. O. Box
576, Birmingham, Alabama.

Rev. A. R. Calhoun, D. D., Secretary Epworth League, Pine Bluff,
Arkansas.

Rev. J. W. Gilbert, A. M., D. D., Secretary Sunday School Department,
Augusta, Georgia.

Rev. T. H. Copeland, D. D., Secretary Superannuated Preachers, Widows
and Orphans Department, Hopkinsville, Ky.


CONNECTIONAL CONTRACTORS

Mr. Wm. Burrows, 1272 Keel Ave., Memphis, Tennessee.

Mr. J. W. Trotter, 436 South Liberty Street, Jackson, Tennessee.

Mr. H. Whitworth, Winston-Salem, N. C.

Mr. J. W. Golden, Kansas City, Mo.


SECRETARIES OF GENERAL CONFERENCE

Rev. M. F. Brinson, D. D., Fort Valley, Ga.

Prof. Geo. S. Goodman, B. Sc., Holly Springs, Mississippi.

Rev. J. E. Raines, Denison, Texas.

Prof. W. M. Bobo, Cotton Plant, Ark.


COMMISSIONS


UNIFICATION

Bishops R. S. Williams, R. A. Carter, N. C. Cleaves; Revs. J. A. Bray,
Jno. W. Gilbert, R. S. Stout; Drs. J. F. Lane, J. A. Lester and W. A.
Bell.


SELECTING AND BUILDING BOOK HOUSE

Bishops C. H. Phillips, R. A. Carter, N. C. Cleaves; Revs. J. C. Martin,
P. J. Coleman; Prof. G. F. Porter and Mr. G. W. Chandler.


COMPILATION AND CODIFYING DISCIPLINE

Bishops N. C. Cleaves, R. A. Carter, C. H. Phillips; Revs. J. C. Martin,
J. A. Bray, M. F. Brinson; Profs. G. S. Goodman, G. F. Porter, N. G.
Walker.


FEDERAL COUNCIL OF CHURCHES OF CHRIST IN AMERICA

Bishops C. H. Phillips, R. S. Williams, E. Cottrell; Reverends C. H.
Tobias, J. A. Hamlett, G. T. Long, J. A. Walker, J. W. Gilbert, Dr. J.
T. Phillips, L. H. Brown, S. B. Wallace.


BOARDS AND COMMITTEES


PUBLISHING BOARD

Bishop R. S. Williams, Revs. J. C. Martin, J. A. Hamlett, G. T. Long, H.
P. Porter, J. A. Ragan, C. W. Holsey, W. J. Turner; Profs. F. R. Baker,
D. C. Potts, A. Hawk.


MISSIONARY BOARD

Bishop N. C. Cleaves, Revs. J. H. Moore, G. L. Word, G. T. Long, W. Q.
Hunter, L. H. Brown, W. P. Pipkins, A. L. Jennings, W. M. Womack.


CHURCH EXTENSION BOARD

Bishop R. A. Carter, Revs. R. S. Stout, W. D. Booker, G. W. Young, W. M.
Crain, H. P. Porter, C. L. Howard, J. H. Howard, J. A. Ragan, G. T.
Long, L. H. Brown, G. M. Noble; Profs. G. F. Porter, G. S. Goodman, Mr.
C. H. Franklin.


BOARD OF EDUCATION

Bishop R. A. Carter, Drs. J. A. Bray, C. L. Bonner, J. T. Speed, I. C.
Snowden, C. H. Tobias, J. A. Lester; Profs. G. A. Payne, D. C. Fowler.


EPWORTH LEAGUE BOARD

Bishop E. Cottrell, Revs. H. B. Leach, W. Q. Hunter, J. H. Coleman, A.
R. Calhoun, J. H. Hudson, G. W. Young.


BOARD OF SUPERANNUATED PREACHERS, WIDOWS AND ORPHANS FUND

Bishop N. C. Cleaves, Revs. T. H. Copeland, J. C. Martin, G. W. Stoner,
N. L. Smith, I. P. Norman, C. M. Newell.


SUNDAY SCHOOL BOARD

Bishop R. S. Williams, Revs. J. W. Gilbert, M. F. Brinson, C. H. Tobias,
C. L. Bonner, W. Y. Bell, J. C. Stanton, J. A. Winters, J. A. Walker.


EDUCATIONAL STANDARDS

Drs. J. A. Bray, F. H. Rodgers, J. F. Lane, John W. Gilbert; Profs. G.
A. Payne, W. R. Banks, A. M. D. Langrum.


AUDITING COMMITTEE

Drs. R. T. Brown, J. A. Lester, Prof. W. M. Bobo.




 CHAPTER II.
 COURSE OF STUDY FOR PREACHERS


PREAMBLE TO THE COURSE OF STUDY

All candidates for the ministry are urged before entering the traveling
connection, to secure, if possible, as much training in literary and
Theological studies as they can. Certificate of graduation from any
secondary school of good standing may be accepted by the examining
committee in lieu of the English branches prescribed in the course for
candidates for admission on trial. A diploma from any college of our
church or any other reputable college, may be accepted in lieu of any or
all collegiate subjects prescribed for conference under-graduates, and a
diploma from any Theological seminary or Biblical Department of any
college of standard repute, may be accepted in lieu of the Biblical and
Theological subjects prescribed for candidates for admission, or for
conference under-graduates.


COURSE OF STUDY FOR LOCAL PREACHERS


FIRST YEAR

 1. Bible with Granberry's Dictionary.
 2. Theological Compend, Benny's.
 3. Discipline and Holsey's Manual.
 4. Hamilton's Hand Book and Plain Account.

To be read: Wesley's Notes. Bible Study Popularized—Lee.


SECOND YEAR

 1. Wesley's Sermons Vol. 1.
 2. Life of Wesley and History of Methodism,—Williams.
 3. Bible and Watson's Dictionary.
 4. Discipline and Holsey's Manual.
 5. Essay—Repentance.

To be read: Life of Christ—Stalker. Training for Service.


THIRD YEAR

 1. Pope's Higher Catechism of Theology.
 2. Plain Account of Christian Perfection—Wesley.
 3. Short History of the Christian Church.
 4. Wesley's Sermons, Vol. 2.
 5. Written Sermons—Regeneration.

To be read: Life of St. Paul—Stalker.


FOURTH YEAR

 1. Introduction to the New Testament—Dodd.
 2. Methodist Polity—Tigert.
 3. Clark's Outline of Christian Theology.
 4. The Bible and Watson's Dictionary.
 5. New Testament Period and its Leaders—Lee.
 6. Written Sermon—Christian Perfection.

To be read: Ethics—Fairchild; Love Enthroned—Steele.


COURSE OF STUDY FOR TRAVELING PREACHERS


ADMISSION ON TRIAL

 1. History of United States; English Grammar; Reading; Spelling; Arithmetic.
 2. Discipline and Holsey's Manual.
 3. Hamilton's Plain Account.
 4. Bible Geography; Bible Dictionary; Side Lights on the Bible.

To be read: Plain Account of Christian Perfection—Wesley.


FIRST YEAR

 1. Outline of Bible History—Dean.
 2. Wesley's Sermons; Vol. I. Sermon 1-26.
 3. Baptism—Merrill.
 4. History of the C. M. E. Church—Phillips.
 5. The Apostolic Age—Purvis.
 6. The Tongue of Fire—Arthur.
 7. Preparation and Delivery of Sermons—Broadus.
 8. Written Sermons—Repentance.

To be read: Telford's Life of John Wesley.


SECOND YEAR

 1. Wesley's Sermons; 27-52.
 2. System of Christian Doctrine; Parts 1, 2, and 3—Sheldon.
 3. New Testament Period and its Leaders—Lee.
 4. History of Methodism—McTyre.
 5. Preparation and Delivery of Sermon—Broadus.
 6. The Training of the Twelve—Bruce.
 7. Pastoral Theology—Kidder.
 8. Written Sermon—Justification by Faith.

To be read: Doctrine of the Prophets; Kirkpatrick; History of the
American Negro—Brawley.


THIRD YEAR

 1. System of Christian Doctrine, Parts 4 and 5; Sheldon.
 2. Elements of Psychology—Davis.
 3. History of Methodism—Dubose.
 4. Extemporaneous Preaching—Buckley.
 5. Ministry to the Congregation—Kern.
 7. Written Sermon—Witness of the Spirit.

To be read: The Pastor and Modern Mission—Mott; How to Conduct a Sunday
School—Lawrence; Life of Bishop A. W. Wilson.


FOURTH YEAR

 1. Grounds of Theistic and Christian Belief—Fischer.
 2. History of the Christian Church—Fisher.
 3. Elements of Logic—Jevons.
 4. Constitutional History of Methodism—Tigret.
 5. Life and the Epistles of St. Paul—Conybear & Howson.
 6. Studies in Immortality—Coburn.
 7. Written Sermon—Sanctification.

To be read: Francis Asbury, The Prophet of the Long Road—Tipple.

Plain Account of Christian Perfection—Wesley. Morning Meditations and
Other Selections—Carter.




 CHAPTER III.
 RULES FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE GENERAL CONFERENCE


I. ORGANIZATION

1. Upon the convening of the General Conference, and after religious
exercises, the Secretary of the preceding General Conference shall call
the roll. If a quorum be found present, the General Conference shall
elect a Secretary and as many assistant secretaries as may be necessary.

2. The Presiding Bishop shall appoint a committee on Credentials,
consisting of one member from each Episcopal District.


II. TIME OF MEETING AND ADJOURNMENT

After the first day's session the time of the opening shall be 9 o'clock
a. m. and 1:30 p. m., respectively. However, these time limits may be
changed at the discretion of the General Conference. A ten minutes
recess shall be taken at 11:30.


III. THE PRESIDENT'S DUTIES

1. At the appointed hour the President shall take the chair, and after
devotional exercises, a quorum being present, the minutes of the
preceding session shall be read and approved. The President for the day
shall then take up the business of the Conference in the regular order
according to these Rules of Order, and other rules and regulations
adopted by the General Conference.

2. The President shall decide all questions of order, and his decision
shall be subject to an appeal to the General Conference. And when an
appeal from his decision has been made, such appeal shall be decided
without debate, provided the President shall be allowed to state the
grounds of his decision and the appellant the grounds of his dissent.

3. Unless otherwise ordered by the Conference, the President shall
appoint all committees.

4. When the President accords the floor to a member, he shall distinctly
announce the name of said member and the Annual Conference he
represents.


IV. ORDER OF BUSINESS

The following shall be the Order of Business:

1. Devotions.

2. Reading the Journal of the previous session.

3. The calling of the roll of Conferences in alphabetical order for the
presentation of appeals, resolutions, and miscellaneous business for
immediate consideration. The member introducing a proposition under this
call may speak to it if it be seconded. If a motion to refer be made, it
shall be entertained and decided without debate; or if the question of
consideration be raised immediately after the proposition has been
offered, and immediately before the person who introduced the
proposition has spoken, the question of consideration shall then be put
without debate. If there be a two-third vote against consideration, the
proposition will not be entertained.

4. Reports of the standing committees, then those of special committees;
provided always, that each call shall have been completed before either
preceding one shall be repeated.

5. Miscellaneous business.


V. DUTIES AND PRIVILEGES OF MEMBERS

1. When a member rises to speak or to present to the Conference any
matter he shall respectfully address the President, and shall not
proceed until recognized by him. The member desiring to speak must
address the President from the place assigned the delegation of his
Annual Conference.

2. The President may call to order any speaker who may be out of order.
There shall be no unwarranted interruption of the speaker by any other
member. However, any member may call the attention of the President when
he deems any speaker out of order. Also any member has the privilege of
explanation when he is misrepresented by the speaker.

3. When a speaker raises a question of privilege it shall not be in
order for him to speak to it until the President shall have decided it a
question of privilege. The following are questions of privilege: matters
relating to the rights and welfare of the individual member or of the
whole body. Such matters must be imperative in character in order to
justify the interruption of the regular order.

4. No member shall speak more than twice on any question without the
consent of two-thirds of the members present; nor may he make a second
speech until every member choosing to speak thereto shall have spoken.
In no case shall any speech be more than five minutes in length unless
by consent of the Conference, provided, however, that the chairman of a
committee making a report or one of its members selected by the chairman
or the committee shall in all cases be entitled to close the debate with
a five minutes speech, despite the motion to lay the report on the
table, or the call for the previous question. When a report consists of
two or more propositions, the right of the committee, its chairman or
its appointee, shall be the same as above defined, even though the
propositions be debated and voted on separately.

5. No member shall absent himself from the sessions of the Conference
without leave unless he is sick or unable to attend.


VI. MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS

1. The mover of every resolution shall present it in writing and in
duplicate. If the President, Secretary or any member request it, any
motion shall be reduced to writing.

2. All written motions and communications to the Conference shall be
read by a Secretary of the Conference.

3. All motions and resolutions when properly introduced and seconded and
all reports read by the Secretary to the Conference or stated by the
President, shall be deemed the property of the Conference. But the mover
of any resolution or motion may withdraw it at any time before amendment
or decision.

4. The following motions shall be undebatable: (a) To adjourn; (b) To
suspend the rules; (c) To lay on the table; (d) To take from the table;
(e) The question of consideration; (f) The call for the previous
question.

5. Every motion or resolution must be disposed of before a new one can
be considered. Procedure in the order of motions shall be according to
the following table: (a) To fix the time to adjourn; (b) To adjourn; (c)
To take recess; (d) To lay on the table; (e) The previous question; (f)
To postpone to a given time; (g) To refer; (h) To substitute; (i)
Amendment; (j) To postpone indefinitely.

6. The motion for the previous question cannot be laid on the table.

7. It shall be in order to move only one amendment to an amendment. But
it shall be in order to move a substitute to the main question, and the
substitute may be amended. If the substitute is accepted, it shall take
the place of the original question.

8. The motion to adjourn is always in order except in five instances, to
wit:

 (1) When a member has the floor.

 (2) When a question is about to be put or a vote is about to be taken,
 or final decision reached.

 (3) When a question is pending on sustaining the demand for the
 previous question.

 (4) When the previous question has been called and sustained and action
 is pending.

 (5) When a motion to adjourn has been voted down and no business or
 debate has intervened.

9. Any member who in the first instance voted on a motion or resolution
with the prevailing side is entitled to make the motion for a
reconsideration, but no one else shall.

10. All resolutions contemplating verbal alterations of the Discipline
shall state the language of the paragraph and the line to be altered,
and also the language to be substituted. Two hours each day or such
amount of time as is necessary to deal with the disciplinary changes
offered, shall be given to the revision of the Discipline, taking it
chapter by chapter, and all amendments shall be offered while the
section is under consideration; and each section shall be amended and
passed before proceeding to another.


VII. VOTING

1. Unless excused for special reasons by the Conference, every member
within the bar of the Conference must vote upon every question submitted
for voting. Voting shall be done by standing, or by "yeas" and "nays"
except that voting on all questions relating to the Episcopacy shall be
done by ballot.

2. On a call for the "yeas" and "nays" by any member, the call shall be
sustained by a one-third vote of the members present except on subjects
relating to the Episcopacy.


VIII. MEMORIALS, RESOLUTIONS AND PAPERS FOR UNANIMOUS REFERENCE

1. Memorials, resolutions and miscellaneous papers not presented for
immediate consideration, shall be placed in the hands of the Secretary
without announcement. Such papers as above referred to must have written
in plain hand on the back of them:

 (1) The name of the member presenting the paper.

 (2) The Conference to which he belongs.

 (3) Subject to which it relates.

 (4) Committee to which he desires it referred.

2. On the call of Conferences for the presentation of resolutions,
petitions, etcs., no Conference shall be allowed to offer more than
three resolutions, petitions or memorials before the call of Conferences
has gone through the entire list of Conferences.


IX. COMMITTEES

The standing committees shall be:

 1. Episcopacy.
 2. Itinerancy.
 3. Boundaries.
 4. Revision.
 5. Education.
 6. Sunday School.
 7. Church Extension.
 8. Literature.
 9. State of the Church.
 10. Publishing Interests.
 11. Temperance and Prohibition.
 12. Missions.
 13. Epworth League.
 14. On Entertaining the next General Conference.
 15. Finance.
 16. State of Country.

The several Annual Conference delegations shall appoint one member for
each committee.

The report of the General Officers shall be made in the following order:

 1. The Quadrennial Address of the Bishops.
 2. The Book Agent's Report.
 3. The Secretary of Church Extension.
 4. The Secretary of Missions.
 5. The Secretary of Epworth League.
 6. The Secretary of Education.
 7. Ministerial Aid.
 8. Superintendent of African Missions.

The reports shall be made during the first days of the General
Conference session, and shall be referred to the appropriate committees.


X. MISCELLANEOUS

1. No person shall be allowed to stand in the open spaces of the
Conference room.

2. There shall be appointed a sufficient number of Orderlies to keep the
aisles clear, and none shall be admitted within the enclosure
constituting the bar of the Conference except delegates and visitors
invited therein by the Conference.

3. The Conference shall be governed in all matters not herein provided
for by the common practices of parliamentary usage.

4. These rules shall not be suspended except by a vote of two-thirds of
the members present and voting.

 J. A. BRAY, Chairman,
 C. H. TOBIAS, Secretary,
 R. S. STOUT,
 J. H. MOORE,
 N. L. SMITH,
 L. H. BROWN,
 E. W. WHITE.




WOMAN'S MISSIONARY SOCIETY


I. NAME

This organization shall be called the Woman's Missionary Society of the
Colored Methodist Episcopal Church.


II. OBJECT

The object of this society shall be to promote the welfare of women and
children at home and abroad through educational and evangelistic work,
to stimulate united prayer and study, to secure a fuller development of
resources and to foster religious movements and community betterment.


III. BOARD OF MISSIONS

There shall be a Woman's Board of Missions with headquarters located in
the city of Nashville, Tennessee.


IV. MEETINGS

1. Annual meetings shall be held for conference and the transaction of
business and in such place and at such time as the Board shall
determine.

2. Special meetings may be called by the President and two other members
or by the Executive Committee.


V. OFFICERS

The officers of the Woman's Board of Missions shall be a President,
Vice-President, a Corresponding Secretary, a Treasurer, a Superintendent
of Young People's and Children's work, a Recording Secretary, and an
Organizer and such other officers as shall be found necessary. The
officers shall be elected by ballot at the annual meeting.


VI. MEMBERSHIP

These officers and the President and Corresponding Secretary of each
conference Missionary Society shall constitute the membership of the
Board of Missions.


VII. FUNDS

The funds of this organization shall be derived from membership dues,
special contributions at meetings appointed in the interest of the
society, mite boxes, donations, bequests, or by any other means approved
by the Board.


VIII. COMMITTEES

There shall be an Executive Committee, such Standing Committees and such
Special Committees as shall be deemed necessary.


IX. AMENDMENTS

This Constitution may be amended by a two-third vote at any annual
meeting. No change which was not submitted to the previous annual
meeting shall be voted on.


NOTE.

In the Index, which follows, the first figures refer to page, and the
second to Article or Section. An expression like this, 232:6, is read,
Page 232, section 6. This expression, 210:IV:I, is read, Page 210,
Article 4, Section 1. This brief statement will serve as a key to the
Index given below.




INDEX


Abstinence, 33;78:4.

=Admission of=, ministers on trial, 82;
 ministers into full connection, 83.

Adults, baptism of, 278.

=Agent=, book, see Book Agent;
 for Bible Society, 70:1:b;
 Sunday School, 70:d;
 literary institutions, 71:1:e.

American Bible Society, 70:1:b.

Alms giving, Article, 28.

=Annual Conference=, members of, 43:1-4;
 number and boundary of, 44;
 Enabling Act, 44;
 time and place of meeting, 45:3-4;
 presiding officer, 45:5;
 order of business, 46;
 preachers on trial, 82:1;
 discontinued, 83:3;
 in full membership, 83:2;
 located, 101:3;
 institutions of learning, 50; 214; 237;
 parsonages and churches, 51; 166;
 committees of examination, 51;
 candidates for the ministry, 52:5;
 examinations, standard of, 52:6;
 General Minutes, 53:8;
 Statistical secretary, 53.

Apparel, General Rule, 30.

=Appeals=, right of, 41:5;
 of a member, 149:3; 156; 60;
 of a local preacher, 144; 155;
 of a traveling preacher, 140; 150;
 courts of, Quarterly Conference, 149;
 Annual Conference, 144;
 ministerial court of, 150;
 General Conference, 153:1-2.

=Arbitration=, stewards on, 107:2;
 disputes between members, 148; 215:1.

=Articles of Religion=, 15;
 not to be changed, 40.

Auditing Committee, 189:3.


=Baptism=, Article on, 23;
 administered to: infants, 273;
 to adults, 278;
 to be recorded by pastor, 80:12;
 administered by deacon, 87:3;
 elder, 89:3;
 a sacrament, 22.

Baptized children, 121.

Benediction, Apostolic, 117:4.

Bible Classes, 122:5.

Bible, only rule of faith and practice, 17; 33.

Bible Society, American, 70.

=Bishops=, election and duties of, 69; 227:8; 232:6; 197:7;
 consecration of, 339;
 support of, 164:3; 179:IV:1;
 retirement of, 74:15;
 organize annual conferences, 74:10;
 president of boards, 75:18; 188:2; 202:II; 210:IV:1; 214:2; 229:3.

=Boards=, Church Extension, Missions, Publishing, Education,
  Sunday School, Superannuated Preachers, Widows and Orphans, Epworth
  League, see departments of;
 of Finance, see Joint Board;
 directors, 229;
 Equalization, 177:II;
 General Departments, members of, 357.

=Book Agent=, 53:8; 177:2; 178:2-3;
 duties of, 179; 180:5-6; 182:7; 190; 191:2-6;
 salary, 191:2; 197:2.

Book House, 190:1.

Books and periodicals, 79:9; 187:3-5; 224:3.

Books, reading of, General Rule against, 30.

Borrowing, rule, 31.

Boundaries of Annual Conferences, 247.

Building Churches and parsonages, 166.

Burial of the dead, form of, 295.

Buying and selling, General Rules, 30.

Buying church property, 170.


Call to preach, 97.

=Candidates=, for the ministry, recommended by quarterly conference,
  59:6; 62:13-14;
 directed to studies, 77:8;
 to be admitted, on trial, 82;
 into full connection, 83;
 for deacons, 86;
 for elders, 87;
 course of study, 361.

Canonical Books, Article on, 17.

Catechism, to be used, 122:4; 224:2.

Ceremonies, Article on, 26.

=Certificate of membership=, 81;
 ministers from other churches, 93:4.

Chaplaincy, provision for, 70.

Charitable institutions, 166:1.

Children, instruction of, 121.

Children's Day, 233.

=Christian Index=, 187;
 Editor of, 188:5; 191:1-2;
 price of, 188.

=Christian Man's Oath=, Article on, 28;
 goods, Article on, 28.

Church, Article on, 21.

Church Conference, 63.

=Church Extension=, Board of, 358;
 members of, 202;
 authority of, 202:2-4;
 executive committee, 203:III:1-3;
 Secretary of, 203:IV:1-7;
 revenue, 205:5;
 form of application, 206:7;
 further authority of, 206:6;
 conference board of, 207:8;
 books, 208:10.

=Church membership=, how secured, 115;
 baptism, form of, 278;
 reception, 285;
 how lost, 33; 144;
 record of, 80:13;
 members from other churches, 115.

=Church=, laying corner stone of, 305;
 dedication of, 311;
 buying lots, 170;
 division or sale of church property, 172;
 building churches, 166;
 building parsonages, 169;
 trustees of, 110.

Circuits, stations and missions, uniting and dividing, 73:8.

Circulation of books and periodicals, 79:9; 187:3; 198:4; 224:3.

Class Leaders, 104.

Class Meetings, 119.

=Collections=, Class, 104;
 General Funds, 178;
 missionary, 194:4; 205:5; 219; 231.

=Commissions=, Unification; Book House; Federal Council; Churches of
  Christ; Compilation of Discipline; Educational Standards, 357.

=Committees=, of examination, 51;
 of investigation: of Bishops, 129;
 of presiding elders, 135;
 of traveling preachers, 134;
 of local preachers, 141;
 of members, 145:a.

Communion, see Lord's Supper.

Community of goods, not enjoined, Article, 28.

Complaints, 60;
 against a traveling preacher, 138:5.

=Conferences=, General, 37;
 Annual, 43;
 District, 54;
 Quarterly, 57;
 Church, 63;
 records of: Church Conferences, 64:2;
 Quarterly Conferences, 60:8;
 District Conferences, 55:4;
 Annual Conferences, 57:3.

Confirmation, not a sacrament, Article 22.

=Constitutions=, Church Extension, Epworth League, Education,
  Missions, Publishing, Sunday School, Superannuated Preachers, Widows
  and Orphans; Woman's Missions, see departments of.

Conversation, uncharitable, General Rule, 30.

Corner Stone laying, 305.

Council, Federal, Churches of Christ in America, 357.

=Course of Study=, local preachers, 361;
 traveling preachers, 362.

Court of Appeals, 150.

=Credentials=, Elders and deacons, deprivation of, 158:1;
 restoration of, 158:2;
 local deacons and elders, deprivation of, 159:1;
 restoration of, 159:2.

Cross Bearing, General Rule, 32.

Cup of the Lord, Article, 24.


Dancing, 147:2.

Day of the Lord, not to be profaned, General Rule, 30.

=Deacons=, how constituted, 86:1;
 missionary rule, 87;
 qualifications, 82:2;
 duties of, 87:3;
 local preachers, 99:2;
 ritual of ordination, 317.

=Decision=, Episcopal, 72;
 Presiding Elder, 76:5.

Deed of settlement, 170.

=Delegates=, General Conference, clerical and lay, 37;
 restrictive rule, 40-42;
 laymen to Annual Conference, 43:1-3; 56:3;
 laymen to District Conference, 55:2.

Deprivation and restoration of Credentials, 158.

Diligence and frugality, General Rule, 32.

Directions to preachers, 84.

Directory, to be kept by pastors, 79:10.

Disputes, how settled, 148.

Dissension, sowing of, 147:3.

Districts, Annual Conference, 73:7;
 General conference, 74:12.

Division, transfer, and sale of church property, 172.

Divorced women, preachers not to marry, 59:6.

=Doctrines of the church=, 15;
 contrary one not to be disseminated, 138:4; 143;4.

Dress, General Rule, 30.

Drunkenness, General Rule, 30.


Eastern Index, 237.

=Editors=, Christian Index, 188:5;
 duty of, 191:5;
 salary of, 191:2;
 Eastern & Western Index, 188:6;
 salary, 192:3.

=Education=, Board of, 358;
 constitution of, 214;
 General Secretary, 218;
 salary, 219:8;
 meetings, 216:4;
 revenue, how derived, 220:9;
 vacancies in, 217:3;
 Annual Conference Board, 220:10;
 educational standards, 221.

=Elders=, how constituted, 87:1;
 qualifications, 88;
 duties, 89:3;
 local, 99;
 restoration of credentials, 158:2; 159:2;
 ritual of ordination, 324.

=Election of=, Bishops, 69:1;
 general officers, see constitutions of departments;
 delegates to General Conference, 37:1-2;
 to Annual Conference, 56:3;
 to Orders, 46; 47:9-16; 86.

Enabling Act, 44.

Episcopacy: see Bishops.

Episcopal decisions, how guarded, 72.

=Epworth League=, object of, 209:2;
 departments of, 209:3;
 boards of, 210:4;
 duties of secretary, 212;
 revenue of department, 213:7;
 Annual Conference, District Conference, and local, chapters, 210.

Evil Speaking condemned, General Rule, 30.

=Examination= of, preachers, 51; 82.

Exhorters, license, 102:1;
 duties, 103:2;
 further directions, 103:3.

Extreme Unction, not a sacrament, 22.


Family and private prayer, 33.

Fasting and abstinence, 33; 78:4; 84:2.

Fighting, general rule, 30.

=Finance=, Joint Board of, how constituted, 184:2;
 duties of, 185; 53:9;
 Recording Steward, 186.

=Financial plan=, general assessment and division, 177:1-2;
 Board of Equalization, 177.

Founder's Day, 245.

Free Will, Article, 19.

Frugality, General Rule, 32.

Full Connection, 83.


=General Conference=, how composed, 37:1-2;
 delegates, clerical and lay, 37;
 voting by Orders, 38:3;
 time and place of meeting, 38:4;
 special session and delegates, 38;
 quorum, 39:8;
 presiding officer, 39:9;
 restrictions: cannot change articles of religion, 40:1;
 restrictive rule for election of delegates, 40:2;
 Episcopacy, not to be destroyed, 41:3;
 General Rules, not to be revoked or changed, 41:4;
 right of appeals, not to be destroyed, 41:5;
 how to change restrictive rules, 41;
 unconstitutional laws, 42.

=General Missionary Society=, members of, 193:2;
 authority of, 194:3;
 revenue, 194:4;
 General Missionary Day, 234:2; 195:5;
 the secretary and his duties, 196.

=General Rules=, 29;
 must be read by pastors, 78:3.

Ghost, the Holy, Article, 16.

God, Article, 15.

Gold, putting on, General Rule, 31.

Good doing, General Rule, 31.

Good works, Article, 20.

Goods, Christian man's, Article, 28.

Goods, not paid for, General Rule, 30.

Government, duty to, 27.

Grace, means of, 32; 116; 235.


Holy Ghost, Article, 16.

Holy Scriptures, Article, 17.

Hospital, 166:1.


Index, Christian, 187:4;
 Editor of, 188:5; 191:5;
 price of, 188:4.

Index, Eastern, 237;
 Editor of, 188; 236.

Index, Western, 236;
 Editor of, 188; 236.

Infant Baptism, Article on, 23;
 ritual for, 273.

=Institutions=, of learning, provisions concerning, 50:8; 214; 237;
 charitable, 166:1.

Investigation, see committees of.


=Joint Board of Finance=, how constituted, 184:2;
 duties of, 53:9; 185;
 recording Steward, 186.

Junior Stewards, 108:5.

Junior Stewardesses, 109:2.

Journal of Conferences, 53:7; 60:8.

Judicial administration, 129.

Justification, Article, 19.


Law, Bishops' decisions on, and appeal from, 72:5.

Law, Presiding Elders' decisions on, and appeal from, 76:5.

Law, going to, Rule, 30.

Laying Corner Stone, 305.

Lay delegates, 37:1; 43:2; 56:3.

Leaders, Class, 104:1.

Leaders' meeting, 235.

League, Epworth, see Epworth League.

Lessens in Public Worship, 116:1.

Local Deacon, 99:2.

Local Elder, 99:3.

Local Preachers, 98.

Locate preachers, 101:3.

Lord's Day, not to be profaned, General Rule, 30.

Lord's Prayer, in Public Worship, 116:1.

Lord's Supper, Article, 24;
 General Rule, 33.

Love Feasts, 120.


Magistrates, speaking evil of, 30.

Marriage of ministers, Article, 26;
 not to marry divorced women, 59.

Marriages to be recorded, 80:12.

Marriage performed by: deacon, 87:3;
 elder, 89:3.

Masses condemned, 25.

Matrimony, not a sacrament, Article, 22;
 ritual, 290.

Means of Grace, 32; 116; 235.

Meditation and prayer, 85:3.

=Members of the Church=, how received, 115;
 ritual, 285;
 removal, 81;
 trial, 144;
 appeal, 156.

Ministers of other churches, how received, 91.

=Ministers of the Gospel=, (pastors and preachers), members of
  annual conferences, 43:2;
 examination of, 51-52;
 duties of, 78-81; 121-122;
 deacons, 86;
 elders, 87;
 how appointed, 70:b;
 advice to, 84-86;
 trial of, 134;
 appeal of, 140; 150;
 unacceptable, 138;
 support of, 163;
 credentials, deprivation of, 158:1;
 restoration of, 158:2;
 ceasing to travel, 101:3.

Ministerial Court of Appeals, 150.

Ministerial Delegates, 37.

Ministers, speaking evil of, 30.

Ministry of the Word, 32.

=Ministry=, support of, pastors, 163;
 presiding elders, 163;
 bishops, 164.

Missionaries, provisions for, 197:7; 199:2.

Missionary on foreign fields admitted in full connection, 84:3.

Missionary Department, General, see General Missionary Department.

Missionary Board, Woman's, see Woman's Missionary Board.

Missionary Society, Woman's General, see Woman's General Missionary Society.


Neglect means of grace, 235.


Oath, Christian man's, Article, 28.

Obedience to civil authority, Article, 27.

Oblation of Christ, Article, 25.

Official Board, or Leaders' meeting, 235.

Old Testament, Article, 18.

Order of Public Worship, 116.

Orders, not a sacrament, 22.

=Orders=, deacons, 86;
 local, 99;
 Elders, 87;
 local, 100;
 examination necessary, 86-88.

Orders, voting by, 38.

=Ordination Ritual=, Deacons, 317;
 Elders, 324;
 Bishops, 339.

Original sin, Article, 18.

Orphans and widows of ministers, provisions for, 228.


Parsonages, building, 169;
 securing, 170;
 sale, 172.

Pastors, see ministers.

Pastoral Visitation, 79:10; 85.

Pelagianism, 18.

Penance, not a sacrament, 22.

Periodicals, 187:3; 224:3.

Poor, collections for, 106:2.

Post Office Addresses, 355.

=Prayer=, family, 33;
 public, 116;
 Lord's Prayer to be used, 116.

Prayer Meetings, 118.

Preachers in charge, duties of, 78.

Preachers, local, 98;
 on trial, 82:1.

Preachers from other churches, 91.

=Presiding Elders=, appointment, 71:2;
 duties, 75;
 support, 163;
 trial, 134.

Probationers for the Ministry, 82.

Public Worship, enjoined, 32;
 how conducted, 116.

=Publishing Department=, object of, 187:3;
 the Index, 188:4;
 management, 188:5;
 members of Board, 188:II;
 annual meeting, 189:II:3;
 Auditing Committee, 189:III;
 Agent, see Book Agent;
 editors, see Editors;
 publishing fund, 177; 182:7;
 surplus, 192:VI:1.

Punctuality, enjoined, 85:2.

Purgatory, 21.


=Quarterly Conference=, how composed, 57:1;
 time and place, 57:2;
 presiding officer, 57:3;
 business, 58-60;
 order of business, 60-63.

Quorum, 39:8; 189:3; 203:2.


Readmission, to Annual Conference, 46; 59:6.

Reading the Scriptures, 33.

=Reception= of members, into church, 115;
 on trial, 82:1;
 into ministry, 83.

=Recommendation=, to Annual Conference for admission on trial, 82:2;
 local deacon, 99:2;
 local elder, 99:3.

Recording Steward, 60; 109; 186:4.

=Records of=, membership, 80:12-13;
 Church Conference, 64:2;
 Quarterly Conference, 60:8;
 District Conference, 55:4;
 Annual Conference, 53:7;
 investigation: of Bishops, 130;
 of preachers, 135;
 trial of, local preachers, 145:4;
 members, 146:d.

Refusing to attend work, minister, 139:6.

Representation in General Conference, ratio of, 37:1.

Reproach of Christ, General Rule, 32.

Restoration of credentials, 158:2; 159:2.

Restrictive Rules, 40.

Resurrection of Christ, Article, 16.

Retired Bishops, 74:15;
 support of, 164:3; 179:2.

Riches, laying up, General Rule, 31.

Right of trial and appeal, 41.

Rites and ceremonies, Article, 26.

Ritual, 261.

Rulers of the United States, Article, 27.


Sabbath breaking, General Rule, 30.

Sacraments, 22.

Saints, not to be envoked, 21.

=Schools and Colleges=, 50:8; 214; 237;
 consent of conference necessary to build, 50:1.

=Scriptures=, canonical, 17;
 duty of searching, 33;
 sufficiency of, Article, 17;
 Testament, the old, Article, 18.

Secretary, general, see departments.

Securing churches and parsonages, 170.

Self denial and cross bearing, General Rule, 31.

Self indulgence, General Rule, 31.

Sick, visiting the, 85:3; 106:2; 320.

Sin original, Article, 18.

Singing, directions concerning, 118.

Slander forbidden, General Rule, 30.

Societies, see departments.

Softness, General Rule, 31.

Songs, rule against, improper, General Rule, 30.

Speaking in strange tongues, Article, 22.

Special or called session, General Conference, 39:6.

Spirituous liquors, General Rule, 30.

=Standing Committees=, Annual Conference, committees on Course of Study, 51.

Statistics, 53; 77:9; 81:15; 47.

Statistician, 53.

Stewards, 105;
 Junior, 108:5;
 Recording, 60; 109:6; 186:4.

Stewardesses, 109:7;
 Junior, 109:VII:2.

Study, Course of, 361.

=Sunday School=, 123;
 department of, 223;
 superintendent of, 59:7; 60; 123;
 object, 224:2;
 editor, 224-225;
 Sunday School Boards in Annual, District and Quarterly Conferences, 226:7;
 appointment of boards, 227:8;
 order of business, 228.

Superannuated Preachers, 47; 90;
 provisions for, 228.

=Superannuated Preachers, Widows and Orphans=, object of, 228:1:2;
 Board of Directors, 229:3-5;
 Secretary-Treasurer, 229-230;
 funds of, 231:III:1-2;
 payment of superannuates, 231;
 claims of widows and orphans, 232:V:1-3;
 report from Joint Boards, 185, a-b; 233:I:4.

Supererogation, Article, 20.

Supernumerary preachers, 89.

=Support of ministry=: pastors, 163;
 presiding elders, 163;
 Bishops, 164.

=Suspension=, by a Bishop, 71:3;
 of a Bishop, 130;
 of a traveling preacher, 136.


Temper, improper, 147:2; 137:3.

Temperance, General Rule, 30.

Testament, the Old, see scriptures.

Time, profitable employment of, 85.

Tongues, speaking in unknown, Article, 22.

Tracts, 77; 224:3.

Transubstantiation, Article, 24.

Traveling preachers, see minister.

Treasure on earth, General Rule, 31.

Trial of those who think they should preach, 97.

=Trials=, right of guaranteed, 41:5;
 of a Bishop, 129;
 of a traveling preacher, 134;
 of a local preacher, 141;
 of a member, 145.

Triers of appeals, 150.

Trinity, Article 15.

Trustees of church property, 110.

Tunes, directions concerning, 118.


Unacceptable preachers, 138:5.

Unction, extreme, 22.

United Society, rise of, General Rule, 29.

Usury, General Rule, 30.


Vacancies, Joint Board, 184:2;
 in departments, see constitutions of.

Veto, 42.

Visiting from house to house, 85.

Voting, by orders, 38:3;
 two-third vote, 41.


=Widows and Orphans= of: preachers, 48;
 provisions for, 232;
 bishops, 165:6; 179:3.

Will, free, Article, 19.

Witness, see trials of members, preachers, etc.

Woman's General Missionary Society, 375.

=Woman's Home Missionary Society=, constitution of, 199;
 object of, 199:2;
 controlled by Annual Conference, 199:3;
 officers, 200:4;
 revenue, 200:5.

Word, the, Article, 15.

=Works=, good, Article, 20;
 supererogation, Article, 20.

=Worship=, attending, General Rule, 32;
 neglect of, 235;
 order of public, 116.


Year Book, 54.



        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DOCTRINES AND DISCIPLINE OF THE COLORED METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


